doc/decisions/README.md, before:

# Introduction

Before you write your first decision, read [Decision Process](decision_process.md).

## Implemented

- [Unit Testing](unit_testing.md)
- [Script Testing](script_testing.md)
- [Bootstrap](bootstrap.md)
- [Empty Files](empty_files.md)
- [CMake Plugins](cmake_plugins.md)
- [Logging](logging.md)
- [Elektra Web Structure](elektra_web.md)
- [Elektra Web Recursive Structure](elektra_web_recursive.md)
- [Cryptographic Key Handling](cryptograhic_key_handling.md)
- [Relative Storages](relative.md)
- [Deferred Plugin Calls](deferred_plugin_calls.md)
- [High-level API](high_level_api.md)
- [High-level API Help Message](highlevel_help_message.md)
- [Global KeySet](global_keyset.md)
- [Rest API Documentation](rest_api_documentation.md)
- [Commit Function](commit_function.md)
- [Error codes](error_codes.md)
- [Error Message Format](error_message_format.md)
- [Error code implementation](error_code_implementation.md)
- [Default Values](default_values.md)
- [Semantics for Name](semantics_name.md)
- [Base Name](base_name.md)
- [Lookup every key](lookup_every_key.md)
- [Holes and Non-leaf values](holes.md)
- [Multiple File Backends](multiple_file_backends.md)
- [Ensure](ensure.md) (@kodebach)
- [Null](null.md)
- [Memory Layout](memory_layout.md)
- [Backend Plugin](backend_plugin.md)

## Partially Implemented

- [Hooks](hooks.md) (@atmaxinger)
- [Array for Warnings](warning_array.md)
- [Array](array.md)
- [Boolean](boolean.md)
- [Reference Counting](reference_counting.md)

## Decided

- [Capabilities](capabilities.md)
- [Make elektraMalloc et al. private](elektra_malloc.md)
- [Elektra Prefix](elektra_prefix.md)
- [Iterating Key Name Parts](iterating_name_parts.md)
- [`keyIsBelow`](key_below.md)
- [Private API](private_api.md)
- [Library Directory Structure](library_directory_structure.md)

## In Progress

- [Iterators](iterators.md)
- [Simplify API](simplify_api.md) (@lawli3t will make proposal of new API)
- [Binary](binary.md)
- [Store the escaped and/or unescaped key name](store_name.md)
- [Remove functions copying into buffer](functions_with_buffers.md)

## In Discussion

- [keyString() return value](key_string_return_value.md)
- [Error Semantics](error_semantics.md) (API)
- [Error Handling](error_handling.md)
- [Spec Expressiveness](spec_expressiveness.md)
- [Metadata in Spec Namespace](spec_metadata.md)
- [Decision Process](decision_process.md).

## Drafts

- [Notifications](notifications.md)
- [Header File Structure](header_file_structure.md)

## Delayed

- [Plugin Variants](plugin_variants.md)
- [Global Validation](global_validation.md)
- [Template](template.md)
- [Explanations](explanations.md)

## Rejected

- [Key Name as separate class](separate_key_name.md)
- [CMake spec](cmake_spec.md)
- [Null Pointer Checks](null_pointer_checks.md)
- [Elektra Web Publish Subscribe](elektra_web_pubsub.md)
- [Internal Cache](internal_cache.md)
- [Vendor Spec](vendor_spec.md)

Commit message:

decisions: rename to TEMPLATE and EXPLANATIONS

doc/decisions/README.md, after:

# Introduction

Before you write your first decision, read [Decision Process](decision_process.md).

## Implemented

- [Unit Testing](unit_testing.md)
- [Script Testing](script_testing.md)
- [Bootstrap](bootstrap.md)
- [Empty Files](empty_files.md)
- [CMake Plugins](cmake_plugins.md)
- [Logging](logging.md)
- [Elektra Web Structure](elektra_web.md)
- [Elektra Web Recursive Structure](elektra_web_recursive.md)
- [Cryptographic Key Handling](cryptograhic_key_handling.md)
- [Relative Storages](relative.md)
- [Deferred Plugin Calls](deferred_plugin_calls.md)
- [High-level API](high_level_api.md)
- [High-level API Help Message](highlevel_help_message.md)
- [Global KeySet](global_keyset.md)
- [Rest API Documentation](rest_api_documentation.md)
- [Commit Function](commit_function.md)
- [Error codes](error_codes.md)
- [Error Message Format](error_message_format.md)
- [Error code implementation](error_code_implementation.md)
- [Default Values](default_values.md)
- [Semantics for Name](semantics_name.md)
- [Base Name](base_name.md)
- [Lookup every key](lookup_every_key.md)
- [Holes and Non-leaf values](holes.md)
- [Multiple File Backends](multiple_file_backends.md)
- [Ensure](ensure.md) (@kodebach)
- [Null](null.md)
- [Memory Layout](memory_layout.md)
- [Backend Plugin](backend_plugin.md)

## Partially Implemented

- [Hooks](hooks.md) (@atmaxinger)
- [Array for Warnings](warning_array.md)
- [Array](array.md)
- [Boolean](boolean.md)
- [Reference Counting](reference_counting.md)

## Decided

- [Capabilities](capabilities.md)
- [Make elektraMalloc et al. private](elektra_malloc.md)
- [Elektra Prefix](elektra_prefix.md)
- [Iterating Key Name Parts](iterating_name_parts.md)
- [`keyIsBelow`](key_below.md)
- [Private API](private_api.md)
- [Library Directory Structure](library_directory_structure.md)

## In Progress

- [Iterators](iterators.md)
- [Simplify API](simplify_api.md) (@lawli3t will make proposal of new API)
- [Binary](binary.md)
- [Store the escaped and/or unescaped key name](store_name.md)
- [Remove functions copying into buffer](functions_with_buffers.md)

## In Discussion

- [keyString() return value](key_string_return_value.md)
- [Error Semantics](error_semantics.md) (API)
- [Error Handling](error_handling.md)
- [Spec Expressiveness](spec_expressiveness.md)
- [Metadata in Spec Namespace](spec_metadata.md)
- [Decision Process](decision_process.md).

## Drafts

- [Notifications](notifications.md)
- [Header File Structure](header_file_structure.md)

## Delayed

- [Plugin Variants](plugin_variants.md)
- [Global Validation](global_validation.md)

## Rejected

- [Key Name as separate class](separate_key_name.md)
- [CMake spec](cmake_spec.md)
- [Null Pointer Checks](null_pointer_checks.md)
- [Elektra Web Publish Subscribe](elektra_web_pubsub.md)
- [Internal Cache](internal_cache.md)
- [Vendor Spec](vendor_spec.md)

## Meta-Information

Even though they use the decision template, following decisions are not real decisions:

- [Template](TEMPLATE.md)
- [Explanations](EXPLANATIONS.md)
