doc/help/kdb-record-stop.md, before:

# kdb-record-stop(1) -- Stop session recording

## SYNOPSIS

`kdb record-stop`<br>

## DESCRIPTION

This command stops the current recording session.
Changes that are made to KDB after this command will no longer be recorded.
The recording session will NOT be cleared.

## OPTIONS

- `-H`, `--help`:
  Show the man page.
- `-V`, `--version`:
  Print version info.
- `-p`, `--profile <profile>`:
  Use a different kdb profile.
- `-C`, `--color <when>`:
  Print never/auto(default)/always colored output.
- `-v`, `--verbose`:
  Explain what is happening. Prints additional information in case of errors/warnings.
- `-d`, `--debug`:
  Give debug information. Prints additional debug information in case of errors/warnings.

## RETURN VALUE

- 0:
  Successful.
- 1-10:
  standard exit codes, see [kdb(1)](kdb.md)
- 11:
  An error occurred during stopping the recording.

## SEE ALSO

- [kdb-record-start(1)](kdb-record-start.md) on how to start the recording session
- [kdb-record-state(1)](kdb-record-state.md) on how to get information about the current recording session
- [kdb-record-reset(1)](kdb-record-reset.md) on how to clear the recording session

Commit message:

doc: update record tooling documentation

doc/help/kdb-record-stop.md, after:

# kdb-record-stop(1) -- Stop session recording

## SYNOPSIS

`kdb record-stop`<br>

## DESCRIPTION

This command stops the current recording session.
Changes that are made to KDB after this command will no longer be recorded.
The recording session will NOT be cleared.
You can use `kdb record-start` to resume the session.

## OPTIONS

- `-H`, `--help`:
  Show the man page.
- `-V`, `--version`:
  Print version info.
- `-p`, `--profile <profile>`:
  Use a different kdb profile.
- `-C`, `--color <when>`:
  Print never/auto(default)/always colored output.
- `-v`, `--verbose`:
  Explain what is happening. Prints additional information in case of errors/warnings.
- `-d`, `--debug`:
  Give debug information. Prints additional debug information in case of errors/warnings.

## RETURN VALUE

- 0:
  Successful.
- 1-10:
  standard exit codes, see [kdb(1)](kdb.md)
- 11:
  An error occurred during stopping the recording.

## SEE ALSO

- [kdb-record-start(1)](kdb-record-start.md) on how to start the recording session
- [kdb-record-state(1)](kdb-record-state.md) on how to get information about the current recording session
- [kdb-record-reset(1)](kdb-record-reset.md) on how to clear the recording session
