scripts/docker/README.md, before:

# Elektra Docker Artifacts

This folder contains all Docker related artifacts.

A list of all Dockerfiles used by the build server can be found in the
[Jenkinsfile](https://master.libelektra.org/scripts/jenkins/Jenkinsfile) and
[Jenkinsfile.release](https://master.libelektra.org/scripts/jenkins/Jenkinsfile.release).

> **Note:**
> Any commands in this file are expected to be run from the root
> of the repository.

## Types of Docker images

We generally have three types of docker images:

1. **Testing/Packaging Docker images**  
   These Docker images are used in our test and package stages of our CI and are able to perform tasks like api documentation or DEB/RPM package generation.
   The prefix of the Dockerfile determines for which task a Dockerfile is used.
   For example a `doc.Dockerfile` has all dependencies to generate the api documentation.
   A dockerfile with the name `Dockerfile` is used for general full builds and optionally also for package generation.
   These images do not have any root priviledges.
2. **Images that test the Elektra packages** _(package.Dockerfile)_  
   Packages are installed during the image build procedure.
   These images are only used in the [Jenkinsfile.release](https://master.libelektra.org/scripts/jenkins/Jenkinsfile.release) to run test-suites and archive the results.
   These images do not have any root priviledges.
3. **Release images** _(release.Dockerfile)_  
   Release images install the latest released version of Elektra (from source or packages)
   and are pushed to DockerHub and our public Docker registry.
   During the build stage, tests are executed on the installed version of Elektra.
   These images are never run as container in our CI as they have permissions to use `sudo`.

## Downloading Released Images

We provide Docker images containing an installed version of Elektra with multiple base images.
You can view all available images Docker images on [DockerHub](https://hub.docker.com/r/elektra/elektra).
To start for example a Ubuntu Focal based Elektra container with the Elektra version `0.9.5`, run `docker run -it elektra/elektra:0.9.5-1-focal`

## Downloading Prebuilt Images

You can download prebuilt images for local testing from our build environment.
List available images via `docker run --rm anoxis/registry-cli -r https://hub-public.libelektra.org`.
Afterwards pull your desired image as you would do from any public registry:
`docker pull hub-public.libelektra.org/build-elektra-alpine:201809-791f9f388cbdff0db544e02277c882ad6e8220fe280cda67e6ea6358767a065e`.

> **Note:**
> We use _hub-public_ instead of _hub.libelektra.org_ which is in use by our
> build server to bypass authentication.
> Only GET requests are allowed on _hub-public_.

## Building Images locally

You can build images locally via the following command, if you use `bash`, `sh` or `zsh`:

```sh
docker build -t buildelektra-stretch-full \
    --build-arg JENKINS_USERID=`id -u` \
    --build-arg JENKINS_GROUPID=`id -g` \
    -f scripts/docker/debian/stretch/Dockerfile \
    scripts/docker/debian/stretch/
```

or:

```fish
docker build -t buildelektra-stretch-full \
    --build-arg JENKINS_USERID=(id -u) \
    --build-arg JENKINS_GROUPID=(id -g) \
    -f scripts/docker/debian/stretch/Dockerfile \
    scripts/docker/debian/stretch/
```

, if you use [`fish`](https://fishshell.com).

You can adapt the targeted Dockerfile via `-f`.
You should also adjust the tag used via `-t` if you are building a different
image.

Please note that the complete images used to test Elektra are quite big
(~3.7GB) and take a some time (15min+) to build.

## Testing Elektra via Docker Images

To replicate errors on the test server you can build the image that ran the
test as shown above.

Afterwards you can start the container via the following command:

```sh
docker run -it --rm \
    -v "$PWD:/home/jenkins/workspace" \
    -w /home/jenkins/workspace \
    buildelektra-stretch-full
```

Note since we used matching userid + groupid to your current user the container
will write to your mounted directory with the correct permissions.

Once you are running inside the container you can use the same commands as you
would use normally to
[configure/compile](https://master.libelektra.org/doc/COMPILE.md)
and [test](https://master.libelektra.org/doc/TESTING.md) Elektra.
There is also some information on how the
[build server](https://master.libelektra.org/doc/BUILDSERVER.md) uses
the Docker images as well as the actual instructions executed by the
build server in our
[Jenkinsfiles](https://master.libelektra.org/scripts/jenkins).

### ASAN

If you enable the leak sanitizer using the option `ENABLE_ASAN` the build [might fail](https://github.com/google/sanitizers/issues/764) printing the following error message:

> LeakSanitizer has encountered a fatal error.
> …
> HINT: LeakSanitizer does not work under ptrace

. To fix that problem please add the option `--cap-add SYS_PTRACE` to the `docker run` command.

## Differences to the Build Server

The build server does not create a bash shell inside the containers.
Instead it runs a nonterminating command (usually `cat`) to keep the container
open.

Afterwards it executes each step via `docker exec`.

There might be some more differences that might influence test outcomes.
One such documented case is [#2008](https://issues.libelektra.org/2008) and
[#1973](https://issues.libelektra.org/1973) where errors on the test
server could not be replicated when running identical commands locally.

Commit message:

doc: replace specific docker image with latest in docker README (fixes #4570)

scripts/docker/README.md, after:

# Elektra Docker Artifacts

This folder contains all Docker related artifacts.

A list of all Dockerfiles used by the build server can be found in the
[Jenkinsfile](https://master.libelektra.org/scripts/jenkins/Jenkinsfile) and
[Jenkinsfile.release](https://master.libelektra.org/scripts/jenkins/Jenkinsfile.release).

> **Note:**
> Any commands in this file are expected to be run from the root
> of the repository.

## Types of Docker images

We generally have three types of docker images:

1. **Testing/Packaging Docker images**  
   These Docker images are used in our test and package stages of our CI and are able to perform tasks like api documentation or DEB/RPM package generation.
   The prefix of the Dockerfile determines for which task a Dockerfile is used.
   For example a `doc.Dockerfile` has all dependencies to generate the api documentation.
   A dockerfile with the name `Dockerfile` is used for general full builds and optionally also for package generation.
   These images do not have any root priviledges.
2. **Images that test the Elektra packages** _(package.Dockerfile)_  
   Packages are installed during the image build procedure.
   These images are only used in the [Jenkinsfile.release](https://master.libelektra.org/scripts/jenkins/Jenkinsfile.release) to run test-suites and archive the results.
   These images do not have any root priviledges.
3. **Release images** _(release.Dockerfile)_  
   Release images install the latest released version of Elektra (from source or packages)
   and are pushed to DockerHub and our public Docker registry.
   During the build stage, tests are executed on the installed version of Elektra.
   These images are never run as container in our CI as they have permissions to use `sudo`.

## Downloading Released Images

We provide Docker images containing an installed version of Elektra with multiple base images.
You can view all available images Docker images on [DockerHub](https://hub.docker.com/r/elektra/elektra).
To start the latest release of Elektra (based on Alpine Linux) you can simply run `docker run -it elektra/elektra:latest`

## Downloading Prebuilt Images

You can download prebuilt images for local testing from our build environment.
List available images via `docker run --rm anoxis/registry-cli -r https://hub-public.libelektra.org`.
Afterwards pull your desired image as you would do from any public registry:
`docker pull hub-public.libelektra.org/build-elektra-alpine:201809-791f9f388cbdff0db544e02277c882ad6e8220fe280cda67e6ea6358767a065e`.

> **Note:**
> We use _hub-public_ instead of _hub.libelektra.org_ which is in use by our
> build server to bypass authentication.
> Only GET requests are allowed on _hub-public_.

## Building Images locally

You can build images locally via the following command, if you use `bash`, `sh` or `zsh`:

```sh
docker build -t buildelektra-stretch-full \
    --build-arg JENKINS_USERID=`id -u` \
    --build-arg JENKINS_GROUPID=`id -g` \
    -f scripts/docker/debian/stretch/Dockerfile \
    scripts/docker/debian/stretch/
```

or:

```fish
docker build -t buildelektra-stretch-full \
    --build-arg JENKINS_USERID=(id -u) \
    --build-arg JENKINS_GROUPID=(id -g) \
    -f scripts/docker/debian/stretch/Dockerfile \
    scripts/docker/debian/stretch/
```

, if you use [`fish`](https://fishshell.com).

You can adapt the targeted Dockerfile via `-f`.
You should also adjust the tag used via `-t` if you are building a different
image.

Please note that the complete images used to test Elektra are quite big
(~3.7GB) and take a some time (15min+) to build.

## Testing Elektra via Docker Images

To replicate errors on the test server you can build the image that ran the
test as shown above.

Afterwards you can start the container via the following command:

```sh
docker run -it --rm \
    -v "$PWD:/home/jenkins/workspace" \
    -w /home/jenkins/workspace \
    buildelektra-stretch-full
```

Note since we used matching userid + groupid to your current user the container
will write to your mounted directory with the correct permissions.

Once you are running inside the container you can use the same commands as you
would use normally to
[configure/compile](https://master.libelektra.org/doc/COMPILE.md)
and [test](https://master.libelektra.org/doc/TESTING.md) Elektra.
There is also some information on how the
[build server](https://master.libelektra.org/doc/BUILDSERVER.md) uses
the Docker images as well as the actual instructions executed by the
build server in our
[Jenkinsfiles](https://master.libelektra.org/scripts/jenkins).

### ASAN

If you enable the leak sanitizer using the option `ENABLE_ASAN` the build [might fail](https://github.com/google/sanitizers/issues/764) printing the following error message:

> LeakSanitizer has encountered a fatal error.
> …
> HINT: LeakSanitizer does not work under ptrace

. To fix that problem please add the option `--cap-add SYS_PTRACE` to the `docker run` command.

## Differences to the Build Server

The build server does not create a bash shell inside the containers.
Instead it runs a nonterminating command (usually `cat`) to keep the container
open.

Afterwards it executes each step via `docker exec`.

There might be some more differences that might influence test outcomes.
One such documented case is [#2008](https://issues.libelektra.org/2008) and
[#1973](https://issues.libelektra.org/1973) where errors on the test
server could not be replicated when running identical commands locally.
