doc/decisions/0_drafts/errors_core.md, before:

# Errors without `errorKey`

## Problem

We often use a `Key * errorKey` argument to return error information via metadata (see related decisions).
In `libelektra-core`, however, that would be inappropriate and sometimes even impossible (e.g., `keyNew`).

Not using a `Key * errorKey` argument can be limiting, however.
Depending on the solution, there can be limited error values, i.e., it may not be possible to use a different error value for every possible error case.
A prime example of this, a function that returns a pointer and wants to indicate an error via that pointer, only has to option to return `NULL`.
So if there is more than one possible error, the error cases have to be distinguished another way.

Therefore, we need a general concept for errors, which we use when an `errorKey` cannot be used.

## Constraints

- Using special return values as errors sometimes is limited.
  For example, only `NULL` is an invalid pointer and sometimes even that is a legitimate non-error result.
- It should be easy to detect error cases.
- It must be possible to distinguish between errors, once an error is detected.
- It should be hard to miss the fact that errors are possible.
  Note, however, this does not mean checking for an error should be enforced.
  There are many cases, where the caller knows an error is impossible, because of the previous code path.
  The requirement is analogous to the `Key * errorKey` argument.
  The presence of the argument makes it obvious that errors _can_ happen, but you can easily omit the error check when you want to.
- Adding error indications should not make the API less convenient to use.

## Assumptions

- In many cases, it is possible to avoid error cases through the preceding code path.
  For example, a very common case is that functions return an error, if they receive a `NULL` pointer.
  Often this case can be excluded by static analysis, i.e., because of the preceding code it is impossible that the pointer is `NULL`.

  ```c
  int foo (KeySet * ks, Key * key) {
    if (key == NULL) {
      return -1;
    }

    // [...] could lots of code, as long as the Key * key doesn't change

    const Key * found1 = ksLookupByName (ks, "/foo", 0);
    if (found1 != NULL) {
      // no need to worry about key == NULL, because we checked earlier
      // also no need to worry about ks == NULL, because the ksLookupByName would have returned NULL
      const Key * found2 = ksLookup (ks, key, 0);
    }
  }
  ```

- It is not always necessary to report separate error codes, for _every_ error case.
  In many cases, the caller can distinguish after the fact, e.g., `keySetName` fails when the given name is invalid and when the given `Key` has a read-only name.
  This can be distinguished after the fact, by checking whether the `Key` has a read-only name with `keyIsLocked`.

- Callers normally don't care about the exact error, unless they can do something about it.
  This could be:

  - reporting the error to a user
  - switching to a different code path
  - (during debugging) changing the code

- Functions can be written in a such a way that they detect and report all errors without permanent effects.

- The functions that cannot use a `Key * errorKey`, are side-effect-free.
  Therefore, the only possible cause of errors are invalid arguments.

## Considered Alternatives

### Extra argument

All functions that report errors take a `int * error` argument to which errors can be written.

This makes the API much more convoluted to use.

A benefit would be the return value remains fully usable.

### Thread Local Storage

Use a field in thread local storage (TLS) to store errors similar to `errno`.

This leaves the API design entirely open.

TLS was only standardized in C11, while Elektra currently only requires C99.

This has all the same issues as `errno`: needs to be cleared to detect errors, can only store one error (per thread), etc.

### Redesign API

Redesign the API, so that every API function only has maximal one error case next to memory errors.

- `nameNew(name) -> name_object` only has the error case of invalid name
- `keyNew(name_object)` won't have error cases anymore
- `keySetName(name_object)` only has the error case of read-only names

This can be very limiting and in some cases makes it very hard to find out what the exact problem was.
Reducing a function to a single error value, makes sense if the errors are easy to distinguish.
But for more complex preconditions, this can be annoying and inefficient to use.
While the above example can be solved, by simple checking with `keyIsLocked`, there could less straightforward cases.
For example, a function `foo` that takes two keynames, both of which must be valid.
To find out which of the names was invalid, the caller would have to call something like `elektraCheckName(name)` on at least one name.
That's a non-trivial check that is not cheap in terms of runtime.
More importantly, it is a check that `foo` already did, and the result could just be propagated to the caller.

### Require caller to check preconditions

If caller are interested in the specific errors, they need to do extra checks, e.g., before calling `keySetName`, they call `elektraCheckName(name)` or `keyIsLocked`.

This is not so intuitive and is against our principle to make it hard to use the API wrong.

It's also unclear, what the function would do, if the caller did not check the preconditions.

### Pragmatic solution

We assume the functions in question are side-effect-free and the only possible cause of errors are invalid arguments.
We also assume that functions _can_ always be written such that they fail before any permanent changes to the arguments are made.

If we assume that _all_ functions are indeed written that way, then we can conclude, that in theory a single error indicating return value is always enough.
The reason is simply, that under the previous assumptions the caller can always make further checks on the arguments to find the exact cause of the error.

However, because sometimes checking arguments can be complicated and expensive (in terms of runtime), we _do not_ reduce all functions to a single error indicating value.
Instead, we take pragmatic approach and try to give more detailed errors, when appropriate and while maintaining a sensible API design.

Below we explore a few different types of functions (in terms of their possible errors) and explore, how they can report errors.

#### Simple preconditions

Many functions' only error cases are precondition violations.
If the preconditions are simple enough, they can be checked beforehand if it is not clear whether the precondition holds.

Take for example the `keyValue` function (after PR #4691).
Looking just at some of the error checks, it looks a bit like this:

```c
if (key == NULL) {
// error 1: precondition violation
}

if (key->keyData == NULL) {
// error 2: invalid Key, COW container missing
}

// success: return value
return key->keyData->data.v;
```

> **Note:** The above doesn't exactly match the real world.
> It is a hypothetical example, and we assume that `key->keyData` should always be set by `keyNew` and when changing the value.

If we want separate error indications for both error cases and a nice API we immediately hit a problem.
The obvious return type is `const void *`, because that's the type of the key value (and we want it const).
But that's a pointer, so only `NULL` could be used for errors.
The issue is, `NULL` may be a valid key value.
So what do we do?

Essentially, we do nothing, "everything is fine":

```c
const void * keyValue (Key * key) {
  if (key == NULL) {
    return NULL;
  }

  assert(key->keyData != NULL);
  if (key->keyData == NULL) {
    return NULL;
  }

  return key->keyData->data.v;
}
```

We return `NULL` for both error cases and even let the errors overlap with a legitimate success value.
In the first case, it's fine for multiple reasons:

- Many callers won't care, if the value inside the key is `NULL` or the key itself is `NULL`.
  For example, `keyValue (ksLookup (ks, name)) == NULL` is probably fine either way.
- If the caller does care, they can easily check `if (key == NULL)` before _or_ after the `keyValue` call.

The second case has a different reason.
The error is not the caller's fault.
It is an internal issue the caller can do nothing about, `key->value` should always be there.
That's why we add an `assert` before the check.
This will trigger in a debug build, where the internal error can be fixed.
For release builds, the `assert` won't be there.
Instead, we return `NULL`, so we aren't forced to `abort()` the whole process and the caller may even be able to gracefully recover from the internal bug.

#### Boolean functions

The overlapping of error and success values has especially positive effects, when we talk about boolean functions:

```c
// returns 1 if key is "foo", 0 if key is not "foo", and -1 if key == NULL
int keyIsFooInt (Key * key);

// returns true if key is "foo", false otherwise (including if key == NULL)
bool keyIsFooBool (Key * key);
```

The `keyIsFooInt` function is very annoying to use, but `keyIsFooBool` is much easier except for the rare case where you need to distinguish a `NULL` key:

```c
// "foo" and not NULL
if (keyIsFooInt (key) == 1)
if (key != NULL && keyIsFooBool (key))

// not "foo" or NULL
if (keyIsFooInt (key) != 1)
if (key == NULL || !keyIsFooBool (key))

// not "foo" and not NULL
if (keyIsFooInt (key) == 0)
if (key != NULL && !keyIsFooBool (key))

// "foo" or NULL
if (keyIsFooInt (key) != 0)
if (key == NULL || keyIsFooBool (key))
```

Especially, if you don't expect the `-1` return value (because `int` is also often boolean in C) bugs arise:

```c
// Expected: key is "foo"
// Actually: key is "foo" or key is NULL
if (keyIsFooInt (key))
// Equivalent: if (keyIsFooInt (key) != 0)

// Expected: key is not "foo"
// Actually: key is not "foo" and key is not NULL
if (!keyIsFooInt (key))
// Equivalent: if (keyIsFooInt (key) == 0)
```

#### Complex preconditions

The above cases assume very simple preconditions.
But sometimes the precondition checks are non-trivial.
Take for example searching for `Key` in a `KeySet` with an escaped name:

```c
Key * ksLookupByName (KeySet * ks, const char * escapedName)
```

Because we return a pointer, the only error option is `NULL`.
But that could mean multiple things:

- No such key found
- Error: `ks == NULL`
- Error: `escapedName == NULL`
- Error: `escapedName` not a valid escaped name

If the caller wants to know which of these was the case, they have to do additional checks.
For the first three cases that's easy, that's just two simple `NULL`-checks.
But detecting the last case is non-trivial.
Validating escaped names means checking a lot of rules.

However, there is once again a very simple pragmatic solution ("everything is fine").
We simply provide a public API function that allows checking, whether a `const char *` is a valid escaped name.
Then the caller can just check after the error occured:

```c
// assume we already know ks != NULL && escapedName != NULL
Key * found = ksLookupByName (ks, escapedName);
if (found == NULL)
{
  if (!elektraIsValidEscapedName (escapedName)) {
    // invalid name
  } else {
    // key not found
  }
}
```

## Decision

**Suggestion:** Go with "Pragmatic solution"

## Rationale

Under the current assumptions this is the obvious solution.
Every other solution borders on over-engineering.

## Implications

- We will need to examine the current API and decide which functions need to be redesigned.

## Related Decisions

- [Error Code Implementation](../5_implemented/error_code_implementation.md)
- [Error codes](../5_implemented/error_codes.md)
- [Error message format](../5_implemented/error_message_format.md)

## Notes

Commit message:

doc: apply suggestions for decisions
Co-authored-by: Markus Raab <markus2330@users.noreply.github.com>

doc/decisions/0_drafts/errors_core.md, after:

# Errors without `errorKey`

## Problem

We often use a `Key * errorKey` argument to return error information via metadata.
In `libelektra-core`, however, that would be inappropriate and sometimes even impossible (e.g., `keyNew`).

Not using a `Key * errorKey` argument can be limiting, however.
Depending on the solution, there can be limited error values, i.e., it may not be possible to use a different error value for every possible error case.
A prime example of this, a function that returns a pointer and wants to indicate an error via that pointer, only has to option to return `NULL`.
So if there is more than one possible error, the error cases have to be distinguished another way.

Therefore, we need a general concept for errors, which we use when an `errorKey` cannot be used.

## Constraints

- Using special return values as errors sometimes is limited.
  For example, only `NULL` is an invalid pointer and sometimes even that is a legitimate non-error result.
- It should be easy to detect error cases.
- It must be possible to distinguish between errors, once an error is detected.
- It should be hard to miss the fact that errors are possible.
  Note, however, this does not mean checking for an error should be enforced.
  There are many cases, where the caller knows an error is impossible, because of the previous code path.
  The requirement is analogous to the `Key * errorKey` argument.
  The presence of the argument makes it obvious that errors _can_ happen, but you can easily omit the error check when you want to.
- Adding error indications should not make the API less convenient to use.
- It should be [hard to use the API the wrong way](doc/DESIGN.md).

## Assumptions

- In many cases, it is possible to avoid error cases through the preceding code path.
  For example, a ubiquitous case is that functions return an error, if they receive a `NULL` pointer.
  Often this case can be excluded by static analysis, i.e., because of the preceding code it is impossible that the pointer is `NULL`.

  ```c
  int foo (KeySet * ks, Key * key) {
    if (key == NULL) {
      return -1;
    }

    // [...] could be lots of code, but the code doesn't change `Key * key`

    const Key * found1 = ksLookupByName (ks, "/foo", 0);
    if (found1 != NULL) {
      // no need to worry about key == NULL, because we checked earlier
      // also no need to worry about ks == NULL, because the ksLookupByName would have returned NULL
      const Key * found2 = ksLookup (ks, key, 0);
    }
  }
  ```

- It is not always necessary to report separate error codes, for _every_ error case.
  In many cases, the caller can distinguish after the fact, e.g., `keySetName` fails when the given name is invalid and when the given `Key` has a read-only name.
  This can be distinguished after the fact, by checking whether the `Key` has a read-only name with `keyIsLocked`.

- Callers normally don't care about the exact error, unless they can do something about it.
  This could be:

  - reporting the error to a user
  - switching to a different code path
  - (during debugging) changing the code

- Functions can be written in a such a way that they detect and report all errors without permanent effects.

- The functions that cannot use a `Key * errorKey`, are side-effect-free.
  Therefore, the only possible cause of errors are invalid arguments.

## Considered Alternatives

### Extra argument

All functions that report errors take a `int * error` argument to which errors can be written.

This makes the API much more convoluted to use.

A benefit would be the return value remains fully usable.

### Thread Local Storage

Use a field in thread local storage (TLS) to store errors similar to `errno`.

This leaves the API design entirely open.

TLS was only standardized in C11, while Elektra currently only requires C99.

This has all the same issues as `errno`: needs to be cleared to detect errors, can only store one error (per thread), etc.

### Redesign API

Redesign the API, so that every API function only has maximal one error case next to memory errors.

- `nameNew(name) -> name_object` only has the error case of invalid name
- `keyNew(name_object)` won't have error cases anymore
- `keySetName(name_object)` only has the error case of read-only names

The advantage is that it is hard to be used wrongly.
Users can only call keySetName if they have a valid key name.
If keySetName fails nevertheless, we know that it must be because the name was read-only.
No further debugging would be needed.

This can be very limiting and in some cases makes it very hard to find out what the exact problem was.
Reducing a function to a single error value, makes sense if the errors are easy to distinguish.
But for more complex preconditions, this can be annoying and inefficient to use.
While the above example can be solved, by simple checking with `keyIsLocked`, there could less straightforward cases.
For example, a function `foo` that takes two keynames, both of which must be valid.
To find out which of the names was invalid, the caller would have to call something like `elektraCheckName(name)` on at least one name.
That's a non-trivial check that is not cheap in terms of runtime.
More importantly, it is a check that `foo` already did, and the result could just be propagated to the caller.

### Require caller to check preconditions

If caller are interested in the specific errors, they need to do extra checks, e.g., before calling `keySetName`, they call `elektraCheckName(name)` or `keyIsLocked`.

This is not so intuitive and is against our principle to make it hard to use the API wrong.

It's also unclear, what the function would do, if the caller did not check the preconditions.

### Pragmatic solution

We assume the functions in question are side-effect-free and the only possible cause of errors are invalid arguments.
We also assume that functions _can_ always be written such that they fail before any permanent changes to the arguments are made.

If we assume that _all_ functions are indeed written that way, then we can conclude, that in theory a single error indicating return value is always enough.
The reason is simply, that under the previous assumptions the caller can always make further checks on the arguments to find the exact cause of the error.

However, because sometimes checking arguments can be complicated and expensive (in terms of runtime), we _do not_ reduce all functions to a single error indicating value.
Instead, we take pragmatic approach and try to give more detailed errors, when appropriate and while maintaining a sensible API design.

Below we explore a few different types of functions (in terms of their possible errors) and explore, how they can report errors.

#### Simple preconditions

Many functions' only error cases are precondition violations.
If the preconditions are simple enough, they can be checked beforehand if it is not clear whether the precondition holds.

Take for example the `keyValue` function (after PR #4691).
Looking just at some of the error checks, it looks a bit like this:

```c
if (key == NULL) {
// error 1: precondition violation
}

if (key->keyData == NULL) {
// error 2: invalid Key, COW container missing
}

// success: return value
return key->keyData->data.v;
```

> **Note:** The above doesn't exactly match the real world.
> It is a hypothetical example, and we assume that `key->keyData` should always be set by `keyNew` and when changing the value.

If we want separate error indications for both error cases and a nice API we immediately hit a problem.
The obvious return type is `const void *`, because that's the type of the key value (and we want it const).
But that's a pointer, so only `NULL` could be used for errors.
The issue is, `NULL` may be a valid key value.
So what do we do?

Essentially, we do nothing, "everything is fine":

```c
const void * keyValue (Key * key) {
  if (key == NULL) {
    return NULL;
  }

  assert(key->keyData != NULL);
  if (key->keyData == NULL) {
    return NULL;
  }

  return key->keyData->data.v;
}
```

We return `NULL` for both error cases and even let the errors overlap with a legitimate success value.
In the first case, it's fine for multiple reasons:

- Many callers won't care, if the value inside the key is `NULL` or the key itself is `NULL`.
  For example, `keyValue (ksLookup (ks, name)) == NULL` is probably fine either way.
- If the caller does care, they can easily check `if (key == NULL)` before _or_ after the `keyValue` call.

The second case has a different reason.
The error is not the caller's fault.
It is an internal issue the caller can do nothing about, `key->value` should always be there.
That's why we add an `assert` before the check.
This will trigger in a debug build, where the internal error can be fixed.
For release builds, the `assert` won't be there.
Instead, we return `NULL`, so we aren't forced to `abort()` the whole process and the caller may even be able to gracefully recover from the internal bug.

#### Boolean functions

The overlapping of error and success values has especially positive effects, when we talk about boolean functions:

```c
// returns 1 if key is "foo", 0 if key is not "foo", and -1 if key == NULL
int keyIsFooInt (Key * key);

// returns true if key is "foo", false otherwise (including if key == NULL)
bool keyIsFooBool (Key * key);
```

The `keyIsFooInt` function is very annoying to use, but `keyIsFooBool` is much easier except for the rare case where you need to distinguish a `NULL` key:

```c
// "foo" and not NULL
if (keyIsFooInt (key) == 1)
if (key != NULL && keyIsFooBool (key))

// not "foo" or NULL
if (keyIsFooInt (key) != 1)
if (key == NULL || !keyIsFooBool (key))

// not "foo" and not NULL
if (keyIsFooInt (key) == 0)
if (key != NULL && !keyIsFooBool (key))

// "foo" or NULL
if (keyIsFooInt (key) != 0)
if (key == NULL || keyIsFooBool (key))
```

Especially, if you don't expect the `-1` return value (because `int` is also often boolean in C) bugs arise:

```c
// Expected: key is "foo"
// Actually: key is "foo" or key is NULL
if (keyIsFooInt (key))
// Equivalent: if (keyIsFooInt (key) != 0)

// Expected: key is not "foo"
// Actually: key is not "foo" and key is not NULL
if (!keyIsFooInt (key))
// Equivalent: if (keyIsFooInt (key) == 0)
```

#### Complex preconditions

The above cases assume very simple preconditions.
But sometimes the precondition checks are non-trivial.
Take for example searching for `Key` in a `KeySet` with an escaped name:

```c
Key * ksLookupByName (KeySet * ks, const char * escapedName)
```

Because we return a pointer, the only error option is `NULL`.
But that could mean multiple things:

- No such key found
- Error: `ks == NULL`
- Error: `escapedName == NULL`
- Error: `escapedName` not a valid escaped name

If the caller wants to know which of these was the case, they have to do additional checks.
For the first three cases that's easy, that's just two simple `NULL`-checks.
But detecting the last case is non-trivial.
Validating escaped names means checking a lot of rules.

However, there is once again a very simple pragmatic solution ("everything is fine").
We simply provide a public API function that allows checking, whether a `const char *` is a valid escaped name.
Then the caller can just check after the error occured:

```c
// assume we already know ks != NULL && escapedName != NULL
Key * found = ksLookupByName (ks, escapedName);
if (found == NULL)
{
  if (!elektraIsValidEscapedName (escapedName)) {
    // invalid name
  } else {
    // key not found
  }
}
```

## Decision

**Suggestion:** Go with "Pragmatic solution"

## Rationale

Under the current assumptions this is the obvious solution.
Every other solution borders on over-engineering.

## Implications

- We will need to examine the current API and decide which functions need to be redesigned.

## Related Decisions

- [Error Code Implementation](../5_implemented/error_code_implementation.md)
- [Error codes](../5_implemented/error_codes.md)
- [Error message format](../5_implemented/error_message_format.md)

## Notes
