doc/dev/data-structures.md, before:

# Data Structures

For an introduction, please
[read first about elektra classes](classes.md).
You might want to read
[about architecture first](architecture.md).

## Introduction

Data structures define the common layer in Elektra. They are used for transferring configuration between Elektra and applications, but also
between plugins.

### ADT

Both the `KeySet` and the interface to metadata within a `Key` are
actually **ADT** (abstract data types).
The API is designed so that different implementations of the
data structures can be used internally.

A sorted **array** provides very fast iteration O(1) and has nearly no size-overhead.

A **hash map** data structure
presents the best candidate for lookups O(1).

`KeySet` combines the best of both worlds:
`KeySet` is implemented as a sorted array and uses
an [order-preserving minimal perfect hash map (OPMPHM)](#order-preserving-minimal-perfect-hash-map-aka-opmphm) for lookups.

### ABI compatibility

Application binary interface, or ABI, is the interface to all data
structures of an application or library directly allocated or accessed
by the user.

Special care has been taken in Elektra to support all changes within the
data structures without any ABI changes. ABI changes would entail the
recompilation of applications and plugins using Elektra. The functions
`keyNew()`, `ksNew()` and `kdbOpen()` allocate the data structures for the
applications. The user only gets pointers to them. It is not possible
for the user to allocate or access these data structures directly when
only using the public header file `<kdb.h>`. The functions `keyDel()`,
`ksDel()` and `kdbClose()` free the resources after use. Using the C++
binding deallocation is done automatically.

## Metadata

Read [here](metadata.md).

## KeySet

This subsection describes what has changed between 0.7 and 0.8 and deals with
some general implementation issues.

### Operations

`KeySet` resembles the classical mathematical
set. Operations like union, intersection or difference are well-defined. In mathematics typically every operation
yields a new set.
Instead, we try to reuse sets in the following ways:

- A completely new and independent `KeySet` as return value would
  resemble the mathematical ideal closely. This operation would be
  expensive. Every `Key` needs to be duplicated and
  inserted into a new `KeySet`.

  Such a **deep duplication** was only needed in `kdbSet()`.

- The resulting
  `KeySet` is created during the operation, but only a flat copy is
  made. This means that the keys in it are actually not duplicated, but only
  their reference counter is increased.
  This method is similar to the mathematical model.
  Compared with a deep copy it can achieve good performance.
  But all changes to the values of keys in the resulting `KeySet`
  affect the original `KeySet`, too.

  `ksDup(const KeySet *source)` produces a new `KeySet`. That way the
  `source` is not changed as shown by the `const` modifier.

- The result of the operation is applied to the
  `KeySet` passed as argument directly.
  This is actually quite common, but for this situation
  other names of the operations are more suitable.

  For example, a union
  which changes the `KeySet` is called `ksAppend()`.

- A new `KeySet` is created, but the `KeySet` passed as
  parameter is reduced by the keys needed for the new `KeySet`. This
  is useful in situations where many operations have to be applied in
  a sequence reducing the given `KeySet` until no
  more keys are left.
  None of the reference pointers change in this situation.

  `ksCut(KeySet *ks, const Key *cutpoint)` works that way.
  All keys below the `cutpoint` are moved from `ks` to the returned key
  set.

### Consistency

There are
several ways to define consistency relations on key sets.
For **strict consistency**
every parent key must exist before the user
can append a key to a key set.
For example, the key set with the keys

```
system:/
system:/elektra
system:/elektra/mountpoints
```

would allow the
key `system:/elektra/mountpoints/tcl` to be added,
but not the key
`system:/apps/abc` because `system:/apps` is missing.
File systems enforce this kind of consistency.

These semantics are however not useful for configurations.
Especially for
user configurations often only some keys need to be overwritten.
It is not a good idea to copy all parent keys to the users' configuration.
For this reason we use a less strict definition of consistency supporting
such holes.

We also evaluated a form of **weak consistency**.
It avoids adding some unnecessary keys.
A constraint is that a key can be added only if it has a parent
key.
But the constraint does not apply if
no other key exists above the key about to be inserted.
From that moment it will serve as parent key for other keys.
With the current implementation of `KeySet`, however,
it is not possible to decide this constraint in constant time.
Instead its worst-case complexity would
be $log(n) * x$ where $n$ is the number
of keys currently in the key set and $x$ is the _depth_ of the
key. The depth is the number of `/` in the key name.
The worst-case of the complexity applies when the inserting works
without a parent key.
For example, with the keys

```
user:/sw/apps/abc/current/bindings
user:/sw/apps/abc/current/bindings/key1
user:/sw/apps/abc/current/bindings/key2
```

the weak consistency would allow inserting
`user:/sw/apps/abc/current/bindings/key3`
because it is directly below an existing key.
It would also allow adding
`user:/sw/apps/xyz/current`
because it does not have any parent key.
But it would not allow
`user:/sw/apps/abc/current/bindings/dir/key1`
to add.
The worst-case complexity was
found to be too expensive, and hence `KeySet` has
**no consistency** check at all.

This means any key with a valid key name
can be inserted into `KeySet`.
The `KeySet` is changed so that
it is now impossible to append keys without a name.
`ksAppendKey(ks, Key *toAppend)` takes ownership of the key
`toAppend` and will delete the key in that case.
The caller does not have to free `toAppend`: either it is in the key set
or it is deleted.

Binary search determines
the position where to insert a key.
The C version of binary search `bsearch()` cannot tell where to insert
a key when it is not found.
So the algorithm has to be reimplemented.
Java's binary search `binarySearch()` uses a trick to both indicate
where a key is found and where to insert it with the same return code
by returning the negative value `((-insertion point) - 1)`
indicating where the new value should be inserted when the key
is not found.
Elektra now also uses this trick internally.

### Iteration

Iterating over a `KeySet` is similar to iterating over arrays.
With `ssize_t ksGetSize (const KeySet *ks)`, the total number of `Key`s in a `KeySet`
can be retrieved and with the function `Key *ksAtCursor (const KeySet *ks, elektraCursor cursor)`
the `Key *` at the specified position `cursor` in `ks` can be retrieved.
The first element (`Key`) has the index 0, so the last `Key` in the `KeySet` `ks` can be
accessed with `Key * k = ksAtCursor (ks, ksGetSize (ks) - 1)`.
Please be aware the elements in a `KeySet` can move and therefore change their index, e.g. when
deleting or adding elements or using `ksCut ()`.

```c
for (elektraCursor it = 0; it < ksGetSize (ks); ++it)
{
	Key * cur = ksAtCursor (ks, it);
	// ...
}
```

## Order Preserving Minimal Perfect Hash Map (aka OPMPHM)

The OPMPHM is a non-dynamic randomized hash map of the Las Vegas type, that creates an index over the elements,
to gain O(1) access.

The elements must be arranged in an array and each element must have a unique name, to identify the elements.
The source can be found in [kdbopmphm.h](/src/include/kdbopmphm.h) and [opmphm.c](/src/libs/elektra/opmphm.c)
and also works outside of Elektra.

The OPMPHM does not store any buckets, your array of elements are the buckets and the OPMPHM represent an arbitrary
index over those. The desired index of an element, also known as the order, is set in `OpmphmGraph->edges[i].order`,
where `i` is the i-th element in your array. When the orders should represent the array indices, the default order
can be applied during the assignment step. When the orders are not the default order, `OpmphmGraph->edges[i].order`
should be set before the assignment step.

Because the OPMPHM is non-dynamic, there are no insert and delete operations. The OPMPHM gets build for a static set of
elements, once the OPMPHM is build, every:

- change of at least one indexed element name
- addition of a new element
- deletion of an indexed element

leads to an invalid OPMPHM and forces a rebuild. A build consists of two steps the mapping step and the assignment step.

During the mapping step the OPMPHM maps each element to an edge in a random acyclic r-uniform r-partite hypergraph.
In a r-uniform r-partite hypergraph each edge connects `r` vertices, each vertex in a different component.
The probability of being acyclic and the number of mapping step invocations depends on the following variables:

- `r`: The `r` variable defines the number of components in the random r-uniform r-partite hypergraph.
  Use the `opmphmOptR (n)` function to get an optimal value for your number of elements (`n`).

- `c`: The `c` variable defines the number of vertices in each component of the random r-uniform r-partite hypergraph.
  The number of vertices in one component is defined as `(c * n / r) + 1`, where `n` is the number of elements
  and `r` is the variable from above.
  The `c` variable must have a minimal value to ensure a success probability, use the `opmphmMinC (r)` function,
  with your `r` from above.
  To ensure an optimal time until success increment the `c` variable with the value from the `opmphmOptC (n)`
  function, where `n` is the number of elements.

- `initSeed`: The initial seed set in `OpmphmInit->initSeed`.

`opmphmOptR (n)` and `opmphmOptC (n)` are heuristic functions constructed through benchmarks. Optimal is only one
mapping step invocation in 99.5% of the observed cases. The benchmarks took arbitrary uniform distributed initial seeds
and the heuristic functions are made to work with almost every seed.

### The Build

#### Initialization

Use `opmphmNew ()` and `opmphmGraphNew (...)` to instantiate the needed structures.
The function `opmphmGraphNew (...)` takes `r` and `c` as parameter. Use the `opmphmOptR (...)`
function to get your `r` value, use this `r` also to get your `c` value the following way:

`c = opmphmMinC (r) + opmphmOptC (n)`

To initialize the OPMPHM build the `OpmphmInit` must be set with information about your data.
Set your data array `OpmphmInit->data` and the element name extraction function `OpmphmInit->getName`,
which should extract the string from a single data array entry.
Provide a good seed in `OpmphmInit->initSeed`, needed in the next step.

#### Mapping

The function `opmphmMapping` uses your seed (the `OpmphmInit->seed` will be changed) and tries to
construct the random acyclic r-uniform r-partite hypergraph, this might not succeed, on cycles just call it again.

#### Assignment

The `opmphmAssignment ()` function assigns either your order (set at `OpmphmGraph->edges[i].order`) or a default order.
The `defaultOrder` parameter indicates the behavior.

After the build the OpmphmInit and OpmphmGraph should be freed.
The OPMPHM is now ready for constant lookups with the `opmphmLookup ()`.

### The Rebuild

Once build, follow the steps from the build, just omit the `opmphmNew ()` invocation.

Commit message:

doc: add copy-on-write section to datastructure documentation

doc/dev/data-structures.md, after:

# Data Structures

For an introduction, please
[read first about elektra classes](classes.md).
You might want to read
[about architecture first](architecture.md).

## Introduction

Data structures define the common layer in Elektra. They are used for transferring configuration between Elektra and applications, but also
between plugins.

### ADT

Both the `KeySet` and the interface to metadata within a `Key` are
actually **ADT** (abstract data types).
The API is designed so that different implementations of the
data structures can be used internally.

A sorted **array** provides very fast iteration O(1) and has nearly no size-overhead.

A **hash map** data structure
presents the best candidate for lookups O(1).

`KeySet` combines the best of both worlds:
`KeySet` is implemented as a sorted array and uses
an [order-preserving minimal perfect hash map (OPMPHM)](#order-preserving-minimal-perfect-hash-map-aka-opmphm) for lookups.

### ABI compatibility

Application binary interface, or ABI, is the interface to all data
structures of an application or library directly allocated or accessed
by the user.

Special care has been taken in Elektra to support all changes within the
data structures without any ABI changes. ABI changes would entail the
recompilation of applications and plugins using Elektra. The functions
`keyNew()`, `ksNew()` and `kdbOpen()` allocate the data structures for the
applications. The user only gets pointers to them. It is not possible
for the user to allocate or access these data structures directly when
only using the public header file `<kdb.h>`. The functions `keyDel()`,
`ksDel()` and `kdbClose()` free the resources after use. Using the C++
binding deallocation is done automatically.

### Copy-on-Write

The two basic Elektra datastructures `Key` and `KeySet` implement full copy-on-write (COW) functionality.
If a key or a keyset gets copied, only a shallow copy with references to the original data (name, value, contained keys, etc.) is created.
When this shared data is modified, new memory is allocated to keep the shared version in tact.
As a consequence, duplicated keys or keysets only require a fraction of the memory compared to their source counterparts.

## Metadata

Read [here](metadata.md).

## KeySet

This subsection describes what has changed between 0.7 and 0.8 and deals with
some general implementation issues.

### Operations

`KeySet` resembles the classical mathematical
set. Operations like union, intersection or difference are well-defined. In mathematics typically every operation
yields a new set.
Instead, we try to reuse sets in the following ways:

- A completely new and independent `KeySet` as return value would
  resemble the mathematical ideal closely. This operation would be
  expensive. Every `Key` needs to be duplicated and
  inserted into a new `KeySet`.

  Such a **deep duplication** was only needed in `kdbSet()`.

- The resulting
  `KeySet` is created during the operation, but only a flat copy is
  made. This means that the keys in it are actually not duplicated, but only
  their reference counter is increased.
  This method is similar to the mathematical model.
  Compared with a deep copy it can achieve good performance.
  But all changes to the values of keys in the resulting `KeySet`
  affect the original `KeySet`, too.

  `ksDup(const KeySet *source)` produces a new `KeySet`. That way the
  `source` is not changed as shown by the `const` modifier.

- The result of the operation is applied to the
  `KeySet` passed as argument directly.
  This is actually quite common, but for this situation
  other names of the operations are more suitable.

  For example, a union
  which changes the `KeySet` is called `ksAppend()`.

- A new `KeySet` is created, but the `KeySet` passed as
  parameter is reduced by the keys needed for the new `KeySet`. This
  is useful in situations where many operations have to be applied in
  a sequence reducing the given `KeySet` until no
  more keys are left.
  None of the reference pointers change in this situation.

  `ksCut(KeySet *ks, const Key *cutpoint)` works that way.
  All keys below the `cutpoint` are moved from `ks` to the returned key
  set.

### Consistency

There are
several ways to define consistency relations on key sets.
For **strict consistency**
every parent key must exist before the user
can append a key to a key set.
For example, the key set with the keys

```
system:/
system:/elektra
system:/elektra/mountpoints
```

would allow the
key `system:/elektra/mountpoints/tcl` to be added,
but not the key
`system:/apps/abc` because `system:/apps` is missing.
File systems enforce this kind of consistency.

These semantics are however not useful for configurations.
Especially for
user configurations often only some keys need to be overwritten.
It is not a good idea to copy all parent keys to the users' configuration.
For this reason we use a less strict definition of consistency supporting
such holes.

We also evaluated a form of **weak consistency**.
It avoids adding some unnecessary keys.
A constraint is that a key can be added only if it has a parent
key.
But the constraint does not apply if
no other key exists above the key about to be inserted.
From that moment it will serve as parent key for other keys.
With the current implementation of `KeySet`, however,
it is not possible to decide this constraint in constant time.
Instead its worst-case complexity would
be $log(n) * x$ where $n$ is the number
of keys currently in the key set and $x$ is the _depth_ of the
key. The depth is the number of `/` in the key name.
The worst-case of the complexity applies when the inserting works
without a parent key.
For example, with the keys

```
user:/sw/apps/abc/current/bindings
user:/sw/apps/abc/current/bindings/key1
user:/sw/apps/abc/current/bindings/key2
```

the weak consistency would allow inserting
`user:/sw/apps/abc/current/bindings/key3`
because it is directly below an existing key.
It would also allow adding
`user:/sw/apps/xyz/current`
because it does not have any parent key.
But it would not allow
`user:/sw/apps/abc/current/bindings/dir/key1`
to add.
The worst-case complexity was
found to be too expensive, and hence `KeySet` has
**no consistency** check at all.

This means any key with a valid key name
can be inserted into `KeySet`.
The `KeySet` is changed so that
it is now impossible to append keys without a name.
`ksAppendKey(ks, Key *toAppend)` takes ownership of the key
`toAppend` and will delete the key in that case.
The caller does not have to free `toAppend`: either it is in the key set
or it is deleted.

Binary search determines
the position where to insert a key.
The C version of binary search `bsearch()` cannot tell where to insert
a key when it is not found.
So the algorithm has to be reimplemented.
Java's binary search `binarySearch()` uses a trick to both indicate
where a key is found and where to insert it with the same return code
by returning the negative value `((-insertion point) - 1)`
indicating where the new value should be inserted when the key
is not found.
Elektra now also uses this trick internally.

### Iteration

Iterating over a `KeySet` is similar to iterating over arrays.
With `ssize_t ksGetSize (const KeySet *ks)`, the total number of `Key`s in a `KeySet`
can be retrieved and with the function `Key *ksAtCursor (const KeySet *ks, elektraCursor cursor)`
the `Key *` at the specified position `cursor` in `ks` can be retrieved.
The first element (`Key`) has the index 0, so the last `Key` in the `KeySet` `ks` can be
accessed with `Key * k = ksAtCursor (ks, ksGetSize (ks) - 1)`.
Please be aware the elements in a `KeySet` can move and therefore change their index, e.g. when
deleting or adding elements or using `ksCut ()`.

```c
for (elektraCursor it = 0; it < ksGetSize (ks); ++it)
{
	Key * cur = ksAtCursor (ks, it);
	// ...
}
```

## Order Preserving Minimal Perfect Hash Map (aka OPMPHM)

The OPMPHM is a non-dynamic randomized hash map of the Las Vegas type, that creates an index over the elements,
to gain O(1) access.

The elements must be arranged in an array and each element must have a unique name, to identify the elements.
The source can be found in [kdbopmphm.h](/src/include/kdbopmphm.h) and [opmphm.c](/src/libs/elektra/opmphm.c)
and also works outside of Elektra.

The OPMPHM does not store any buckets, your array of elements are the buckets and the OPMPHM represent an arbitrary
index over those. The desired index of an element, also known as the order, is set in `OpmphmGraph->edges[i].order`,
where `i` is the i-th element in your array. When the orders should represent the array indices, the default order
can be applied during the assignment step. When the orders are not the default order, `OpmphmGraph->edges[i].order`
should be set before the assignment step.

Because the OPMPHM is non-dynamic, there are no insert and delete operations. The OPMPHM gets build for a static set of
elements, once the OPMPHM is build, every:

- change of at least one indexed element name
- addition of a new element
- deletion of an indexed element

leads to an invalid OPMPHM and forces a rebuild. A build consists of two steps the mapping step and the assignment step.

During the mapping step the OPMPHM maps each element to an edge in a random acyclic r-uniform r-partite hypergraph.
In a r-uniform r-partite hypergraph each edge connects `r` vertices, each vertex in a different component.
The probability of being acyclic and the number of mapping step invocations depends on the following variables:

- `r`: The `r` variable defines the number of components in the random r-uniform r-partite hypergraph.
  Use the `opmphmOptR (n)` function to get an optimal value for your number of elements (`n`).

- `c`: The `c` variable defines the number of vertices in each component of the random r-uniform r-partite hypergraph.
  The number of vertices in one component is defined as `(c * n / r) + 1`, where `n` is the number of elements
  and `r` is the variable from above.
  The `c` variable must have a minimal value to ensure a success probability, use the `opmphmMinC (r)` function,
  with your `r` from above.
  To ensure an optimal time until success increment the `c` variable with the value from the `opmphmOptC (n)`
  function, where `n` is the number of elements.

- `initSeed`: The initial seed set in `OpmphmInit->initSeed`.

`opmphmOptR (n)` and `opmphmOptC (n)` are heuristic functions constructed through benchmarks. Optimal is only one
mapping step invocation in 99.5% of the observed cases. The benchmarks took arbitrary uniform distributed initial seeds
and the heuristic functions are made to work with almost every seed.

### The Build

#### Initialization

Use `opmphmNew ()` and `opmphmGraphNew (...)` to instantiate the needed structures.
The function `opmphmGraphNew (...)` takes `r` and `c` as parameter. Use the `opmphmOptR (...)`
function to get your `r` value, use this `r` also to get your `c` value the following way:

`c = opmphmMinC (r) + opmphmOptC (n)`

To initialize the OPMPHM build the `OpmphmInit` must be set with information about your data.
Set your data array `OpmphmInit->data` and the element name extraction function `OpmphmInit->getName`,
which should extract the string from a single data array entry.
Provide a good seed in `OpmphmInit->initSeed`, needed in the next step.

#### Mapping

The function `opmphmMapping` uses your seed (the `OpmphmInit->seed` will be changed) and tries to
construct the random acyclic r-uniform r-partite hypergraph, this might not succeed, on cycles just call it again.

#### Assignment

The `opmphmAssignment ()` function assigns either your order (set at `OpmphmGraph->edges[i].order`) or a default order.
The `defaultOrder` parameter indicates the behavior.

After the build the OpmphmInit and OpmphmGraph should be freed.
The OPMPHM is now ready for constant lookups with the `opmphmLookup ()`.

### The Rebuild

Once build, follow the steps from the build, just omit the `opmphmNew ()` invocation.
