doc/AUTHORS.md, before:

# Authors

This is a list of people that contributed to the Elektra Initiative.

## Markus Raab

maintainer, main development, documentation, quality

- email: markus@libelektra.org
- devel/test on: Debian stable

## Mihael Pranjić

maintainer, development of the cache and mmapstorage plugins

- email: mpranj@limun.org
- GitHub user: [mpranj](https://github.com/mpranj)
- devel/test on: Fedora, Debian, macOS

## Klemens Böswirth

a bit of everything

- email: k.boeswirth+git@gmail.com
- GitHub user: [kodebach](https://github.com/kodebach)
- devel/test on: Manjaro

## Robert Sowula

packaging, release automation

- email: robert@sowula.at
- GitHub user: [robaerd](https://github.com/robaerd)
- devel/test on: Debian, Ubuntu

## Michael Tucek

Java bindings

- email: libelektra@hellwach.at
- GitHub user: [tucek](https://github.com/tucek)
- devel/test on: Debian (WSL2), Ubuntu (WSL2)

## Manuel Mausz

SWIG bindings

- email: manuel-elektra@mausz.at
- devel/test on: Fedora

## Dardan Haxhimustafa

development of KConfig plugin

- email: mail@dardan.im
- GitHub user: [darddan](https://github.com/darddan)
- devel/test on: Arch Linux

## Felix Berlakovich

journald plugin, augeas plugin, keytometa

- email: elektra@berlakovich.net
- devel/test on: Debian

## Kai-Uwe Behrmann

test & packaging on CentOS, Fedora, OpenSUSE, RHEL and SLE

- email: kai-uwe@behrmann.name

## Charles Lindsay

ni library

## Avi Alkalay

initial concept & implementation

- email: avi@Unix.sh

## Patrick Sabin

trie development, previous python bindings

- email: patricksabin@gmx.at

## Daniel Bugl

documentation, web ui

- email: me@omnidan.net

## Kurt Micheli

optimizing ksLookup with order preserving minimal perfect hash map, Markdown link converter for doxygen

- email: e1026558@student.tuwien.ac.at

## Alexander Rössler

improvements to the dbus plugin

- email: mail@roessler.systems

## Peter Nirschl

development of the crypto plugin, minor bug fixes, BSD/macOS support

- email: peter.nirschl@gmail.com
- GitHub user: [petermax2](http://github.com/petermax2)
- devel on: Fedora
- test on: Fedora, Debian, macOS

## René Schwaiger

documentation, bug fixes

- email: sanssecours@me.com
- GitHub user: [sanssecours](http://github.com/sanssecours)
- devel/test on: macOS

## Marvin Mall

development of the REST service & frontend for sharing of conf. snippets, cachefilter plugin, website

- email: marvin-mall@msn.com
- GitHub user: [Namoshek](https://github.com/Namoshek)
- devel/test on: Debian Jessie

## Thomas Waser

main development, many plugins, ansible

- email: thomas.waser@libelektra.org
- GitHub user: [tom-wa](https://github.com/tom-wa)
- devel/test on: Debian Testing/Sid

## Raffael Pancheri

design and implementation of the qt-gui

- email: raffael@libelektra.org
- GitHub user: [0003088](https://github.com/0003088)

## Bernhard Denner

ruby bindings, ruby plugin, build server, Puppet module

- email: bernhard.denner@gmail.com
- GitHub user: [BernhardDenner](https://github.com/BernhardDenner)
- devel/test on: Ubuntu and Debian

## Thomas Wahringer

notification system, I/O bindings

- email: waht@libelektra.org
- GitHub user: [waht](https://github.com/waht)
- devel/test on: Debian

## Maximilian Irlinger

documentation, Python bindings for elektraMerge

- email: max@maxirlinger.at
- GitHub user: [atmaxinger](https://github.com/atmaxinger)
- devel/test on: Fedora, macOS

Commit message:

authors: add copy-on-write

doc/AUTHORS.md, after:

# Authors

This is a list of people that contributed to the Elektra Initiative.

## Markus Raab

maintainer, main development, documentation, quality

- email: markus@libelektra.org
- devel/test on: Debian stable

## Mihael Pranjić

maintainer, development of the cache and mmapstorage plugins

- email: mpranj@limun.org
- GitHub user: [mpranj](https://github.com/mpranj)
- devel/test on: Fedora, Debian, macOS

## Klemens Böswirth

a bit of everything

- email: k.boeswirth+git@gmail.com
- GitHub user: [kodebach](https://github.com/kodebach)
- devel/test on: Manjaro

## Robert Sowula

packaging, release automation

- email: robert@sowula.at
- GitHub user: [robaerd](https://github.com/robaerd)
- devel/test on: Debian, Ubuntu

## Michael Tucek

Java bindings

- email: libelektra@hellwach.at
- GitHub user: [tucek](https://github.com/tucek)
- devel/test on: Debian (WSL2), Ubuntu (WSL2)

## Manuel Mausz

SWIG bindings

- email: manuel-elektra@mausz.at
- devel/test on: Fedora

## Dardan Haxhimustafa

development of KConfig plugin

- email: mail@dardan.im
- GitHub user: [darddan](https://github.com/darddan)
- devel/test on: Arch Linux

## Felix Berlakovich

journald plugin, augeas plugin, keytometa

- email: elektra@berlakovich.net
- devel/test on: Debian

## Kai-Uwe Behrmann

test & packaging on CentOS, Fedora, OpenSUSE, RHEL and SLE

- email: kai-uwe@behrmann.name

## Charles Lindsay

ni library

## Avi Alkalay

initial concept & implementation

- email: avi@Unix.sh

## Patrick Sabin

trie development, previous python bindings

- email: patricksabin@gmx.at

## Daniel Bugl

documentation, web ui

- email: me@omnidan.net

## Kurt Micheli

optimizing ksLookup with order preserving minimal perfect hash map, Markdown link converter for doxygen

- email: e1026558@student.tuwien.ac.at

## Alexander Rössler

improvements to the dbus plugin

- email: mail@roessler.systems

## Peter Nirschl

development of the crypto plugin, minor bug fixes, BSD/macOS support

- email: peter.nirschl@gmail.com
- GitHub user: [petermax2](http://github.com/petermax2)
- devel on: Fedora
- test on: Fedora, Debian, macOS

## René Schwaiger

documentation, bug fixes

- email: sanssecours@me.com
- GitHub user: [sanssecours](http://github.com/sanssecours)
- devel/test on: macOS

## Marvin Mall

development of the REST service & frontend for sharing of conf. snippets, cachefilter plugin, website

- email: marvin-mall@msn.com
- GitHub user: [Namoshek](https://github.com/Namoshek)
- devel/test on: Debian Jessie

## Thomas Waser

main development, many plugins, ansible

- email: thomas.waser@libelektra.org
- GitHub user: [tom-wa](https://github.com/tom-wa)
- devel/test on: Debian Testing/Sid

## Raffael Pancheri

design and implementation of the qt-gui

- email: raffael@libelektra.org
- GitHub user: [0003088](https://github.com/0003088)

## Bernhard Denner

ruby bindings, ruby plugin, build server, Puppet module

- email: bernhard.denner@gmail.com
- GitHub user: [BernhardDenner](https://github.com/BernhardDenner)
- devel/test on: Ubuntu and Debian

## Thomas Wahringer

notification system, I/O bindings

- email: waht@libelektra.org
- GitHub user: [waht](https://github.com/waht)
- devel/test on: Debian

## Maximilian Irlinger

documentation, Python bindings for elektraMerge, copy-on-write functionality of Key and KeySet

- email: max@maxirlinger.at
- GitHub user: [atmaxinger](https://github.com/atmaxinger)
- devel/test on: Fedora, macOS
