# 0.9.1 Release

- guid: 8c64fe8a-87a5-4b72-b772-d98c8a4a5efd
- author: Mihael Pranjić
- pubDate: Tue, 26 Nov 2019 14:55:19 +0100
- shortDesc: KDE Integration, Rust&Go Bindings, Code Generation

We are proud to release Elektra 0.9.1.

## What is Elektra?

Elektra serves as a universal and secure framework to access
configuration settings in a global, hierarchical key database.
For more information, visit [https://libelektra.org](https://libelektra.org).

You can also read the news [on our website](https://www.libelektra.org/news/0.9.1-release)

## Highlights

- We are working on integrating Elektra into [KDE](https://kde.org/). A new Elektra plugin called `kconfig` was added which can read KDE's kconfig ini files. Additionally we are working on a [fork](https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/kconfig) of KDE's `KConfig` configuration system and patching it to use libelektra. _(Dardan Haxhimustafa)_ and _(Felix Resch)_
- The [elektra](https://crates.io/crates/elektra) and [elektra-sys](https://crates.io/crates/elektra-sys) crates have been published to crates.io for easier usage of our Rust binding. _(Philipp Gackstatter)_
- We improved our [Go bindings](https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/go-elektra). _(Raphael Gruber)_
- Code Generation is ready for productive use. _(Klemens Böswirth)_

### Code Generation

While the new `kdb gen` was already included in the last release, it is now fully functional and ready for productive use. To get started take a look
at the new man-page for [`kdb-gen(1)`](https://www.libelektra.org/man-pages/kdb-gen).

If you specifically want to use it with the High-Level API take a look at [this tutorial](https://www.libelektra.org/tutorials/high-level-api).

We also created a new CMake function that will be available, if you include Elektra via CMake's
`find_package`. The function is called `elektra_kdb_gen` and can be used to tell CMake about files
that are generated via `kdb gen`. _(Klemens Böswirth)_

### Further Highlights

- We migrated our [build server](https://build.libelektra.org) and [website](https://www.libelektra.org) to up-to-date hardware. _(Markus Raab and Djordje Bulatovic)_
- Elektra now has a technical preview of a new [merge library](https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/libelektra/blob/0.9.10/doc/tutorials/cmerge.md). It is written in C99 and can currently be used with [`kdb cmerge`](https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/libelektra/blob/0.9.10/doc/help/kdb-cmerge.md). _(Dominic Jäger)_
- We make it easier for new developers to join Elektra, e.g., see new [get started](../../doc/GETSTARTED.md). _(Hani Torabi)_
- We made many cleanups, to get Elektra ready for 1.0!

## Plugins

The following section lists news about the [plugins](https://www.libelektra.org/plugins/readme) we updated in this release.

### General

- We removed 12 obsolete or unfinished plugins:
  - `boolean`,
  - `cachefilter`,
  - `cpptype`,
  - `dini`,
  - `enum`,
  - `regexstore`,
  - `required`,
  - `haskell`,
  - `simplespeclang`,
  - `regexdispatcher`,
  - `typechecker`,
  - `struct`. _(Markus Raab, René Schwaiger)_
- We unified the name of the config check function of the plugins to `nameOfPluginCheckConf`. Before this update some plugins used the name `nameOfPluginCheckConfig` instead. _(René Schwaiger)_
- We improved the error messages in `crypto`, `fcrypt`, and `gpgme` plugins. _(Peter Nirschl)_
- We now correctly handle return codes (error codes) of `execv` in the GPG module. _(Peter Nirschl)_
- We improved the documentation of `ksAppendKey` regarding ownership of keys. _(Raphael Gruber)_
- We removed the experimental status of the following plugins:
  - `gopts`
  - `specload`. _(Klemens Böswirth)_
- We added the following experimental plugins:
  - `kconfig`. _(Dardan Haxhimustafa)_

### Camel

We removed the experimental plugin. For a plugin that is able to parse similar syntax, please take a look at the

- [YAJL](../../src/plugins/yajl) , and
- [YAML CPP](../../src/plugins/yamlcpp)

plugins. _(René Schwaiger)_

### GOpts

- The error message, if non of the gopts variants can be compiled, was improved. _(Klemens Böswirth)_
- A better error, if the plugin fails to load `argv` from the system, was added. _(Klemens Böswirth)_
- A function to detect help mode, without invoking `elektraGetOpts` was added. It simply checks, whether `--help` is one
  of the string in `argv`. _(Klemens Böswirth)_
- Increase test timeout from 120s to 240s. _(Mihael Pranjić)_

### KConfig

- We added a plugin which can be used to parse kconfig INI files. _(Dardan Haxhimustafa)_

### Mmapstorage

- We now store the OPMPHM inside of the mmap format. _(Mihael Pranjić)_
- The storage format was changed and many sanity checks were improved or added. _(Mihael Pranjić)_
- Enforce consistency by writing the magic file footer last. _(Mihael Pranjić)_
- Filter empty meta KeySets to save space. _(Mihael Pranjić)_

### Noresolver

- The plugin now correctly sets the path in the `parentKey`. It therefore now supports set calls. _(Klemens Böswirth)_

### Path

- The [Markdown Shell Recorder][] test of the plugin now also works, if you execute it as root user. _(René Schwaiger)_

[markdown shell recorder]: https://master.libelektra.org/tests/shell/shell_recorder/tutorial_wrapper

### Spec

- There is now the config key `missing/log` that allows logging of all missing `require`d keys. _(Klemens Böswirth)_
- `spec` now internally handles errors differently. There should be no external impact apart from better performance. _(Klemens Böswirth)_

### Specload

- We now treat relative paths as relative to `KDB_DB_SPEC` instead of the current working directory. _(Klemens Böswirth)_
- Changes to `default` or `type` metadata are no longer supported, since they are not safe in every case. _(Klemens Böswirth)_
- The plugin no longer has the `experimental` status. _(Klemens Böswirth)_

### Tcl

- We made sure that building the plugin works, if you use the latest version of CMake (`3.15.3`) and Boost (`1.71`). _(René Schwaiger)_

### Type

- We added an option to disable the restoring of boolean values. This useful for storage formats like YAML that have
  native boolean types. _(Klemens Böswirth)_

### Yajl

- Yajl now correctly supports Elektras boolean types using the `type` plugin. For example, setting `on`, `enable` or `true` all map to JSONs native `true` value. See the [type](../../src/plugins/type/README.md) plugin for more details about boolean types. _(Philipp Gackstatter)_

### YAwn

- We removed the plugin in favor of Yan LR. _(René Schwaiger)_

### YAy PEG

- We removed the plugin in favor of Yan LR. _(René Schwaiger)_

## Libraries

The text below summarizes updates to the [C (and C++)-based libraries](https://www.libelektra.org/libraries/readme) of Elektra.

### Compatibility

We introduced several incompatible changes:

- The library `libelektra`, which is a collection of different elektra libraries, is now removed.
  Users of CMake or pkg-config should not be affected. Otherwise change `-lelektra` to `-lelektra-core -lelektra-kdb`
  or whatever parts of Elektra your application uses. _(Markus Raab)_
- The conversion functions `elektraKeyTo*` and `elektra*ToString` are now part of the `elektra-ease` library instead of
  the `elektra-highlevel` library. This should not cause any breaking changes since `elektra-highlevel` already depends
  on `elektra-ease`. In addition the header `elektra/conversion.h` is kept for compatibility. _(Klemens Böswirth)_
- Fixes in documentation that might disallow some code operating in grey areas before. _(Markus Raab)_
- We removed `keyRel` and `keyRel2` since it can be easily replaced by other existing functions. _(Philipp Gackstatter)_

We changed the following symbols:

- ELEKTRA_PLUGIN_COMMIT
- elektraKeyToString
- elektraKeyToBoolean
- elektraKeyToChar
- elektraKeyToOctet
- elektraKeyToShort
- elektraKeyToUnsignedShort
- elektraKeyToLong
- elektraKeyToUnsignedLong
- elektraKeyToLongLong
- elektraKeyToUnsignedLongLong
- elektraKeyToFloat
- elektraKeyToDouble
- elektraKeyToLongDouble
- elektraBooleanToString
- elektraCharToString
- elektraOctetToString
- elektraShortToString
- elektraUnsignedShortToString
- elektraLongToString
- elektraUnsignedLongToString
- elektraLongLongToString
- elektraUnsignedLongLongToString
- elektraFloatToString
- elektraDoubleToString
- elektraLongDoubleToString
- kdb_octet_t
- kdb_boolean_t
- kdb_short_t
- kdb_long_t
- kdb_long_long_t
- kdb_unsigned_short_t
- kdb_unsigned_long_t
- kdb_unsigned_long_long_t
- kdb_char_t
- kdb_float_t
- kdb_double_t
- kdb_long_double_t

### Core

- A new plugin function, `kdbCommit`, was implemented. The function is carried out in the `commit` phase of `kdbSet` and separates the commit functionality from the `kdbSet()` function. _(Vid Leskovar)_
- `kdbconfig.h` is no longer included in the installed headers. This is because it could cause conflicts with other
  `config.h`-type headers from applications. _(Klemens Böswirth)_
- `ksAppendKey`: state that it only fail on memory problems. _(Markus Raab)_
- Fix memory leak in `kdbGet`. _(Markus Raab)_
- Implemented `kdberrors.h` directly without generation of the `specification` file because of drastically reduced error code count _(Michael Zronek)_
- `keyIsDirectBelow` was renamed to `keyIsDirectlyBelow`. _(Philipp Gackstatter)_
- `keyMeta` was added to provide access to a key's underlying KeySet that holds its metadata keys. _(Philipp Gackstatter)_
- Removed the obsolete `ksLookupByString` and `ksLookupByBinary`, as well as deprecated `KDB_O_*` options. _(Philipp Gackstatter)_
- Added `keyLock` and `keyIsLocked`. _(Manuel Mausz)_
- Removed `keyVInit`. _(Manuel Mausz)_

### Opts

- The option `-h` is no longer used to indicate help mode. Only `--help`, will invoke help mode. _(Klemens Böswirth)_

### Proposal

- Removed or moved several functions of `kdbproposal.h`:
  - `elektraKsToMemArray` was moved to `kdbease.h`,
  - `elektraLookupOptions` was moved to `kdbprivate.h`,
  - `keySetStringF` was moved to `kdbinternal.h`,
  - Removed `ksPrev` and `elektraKsPrev`,
  - Removed `elektraRenameKeys` and replaced it with `ksRenameKeys`. _(Philipp Gackstatter)_

## Bindings

Bindings allow you to utilize Elektra using [various programming languages](https://www.libelektra.org/bindings/readme). This section keeps
you up-to-date with the multi-language support provided by Elektra.

- We removed the Haskell and GI bindings. _(Markus Raab)_
- Avoid unnecessary copying std::string where possible (setString and setMeta only). _(Manuel Mausz)_
- CPP: add `Key::is{Name,Value,Meta}Locked`. _(Manuel Mausz)_
- GLIB: removed `gelektra_keyset_resize`. _(Manuel Mausz)_
- GLIB: removed `gelektra_keyset_rewind`, `gelektra_keyset_next`, `gelektra_keyset_current`, `gelektra_keyset_getcursor`, `gelektra_keyset_setcursor`. _(Manuel Mausz)_
- GLIB: renamed `gelektra_keyset_atcursor` to `gelektra_keyset_at`. _(Manuel Mausz)_
- gsettings: adapt iterator. _(Manuel Mausz)_
- SWIG: Add `KeyNotFoundException` exception. _(Manuel Mausz)_
- SWIG: Fix KeySet equality operators. _(Manuel Mausz)_
- SWIG/Python: `hash(key)` will throw unless the key name is locked. _(Manuel Mausz)_
- SWIG/Python: Add operator overloadings for `len(Key)`, `repr(Key)`, `str(KeySet)`, `repr(KeySet)`. _(Manuel Mausz)_
- SWIG/Python: Add alternative Key constructor `Key(name, value, [dict])`. _(Manuel Mausz)_
- SWIG/Python: Add `KeySet.extend([key1, key2,...])` and `KeySet.append(key1, key2, ...)`. _(Manuel Mausz)_
- SWIG/Python: Add `KeySet.append(key_name, key_value, key_opts)` which directly creates and appends a key. _(Manuel Mausz)_
- SWIG/Python: Add `KeySet.unpack_names()`, `KeySet.unpack_basenames()`, `KeySet.filter(func)`, `KeySet.filter_below(where)`, `Key.array_elements()`. _(Manuel Mausz)_

### Java

- Completely overhauled the Java binding to be able to use Elektra plugins directly. A new PluginLoader can load Elektra plugins or a native implemented Java plugin.
  All Plugins now implement the new [Plugin](../../src/bindings/jna/libelektra/src/main/java/org/libelektra/Plugin.java) interface.
  For an example see the [test case](../../src/bindings/jna/libelektra/src/test/java/org/libelektra/PluginLoaderIT.java). _(Michael Zronek)_
- Upgraded maven dependencies for Java binding _(Michael Zronek)_
- The Java binding now supports the [error codes](../decisions/6_implemented/error_codes.md) in a native way. All exceptions contain the necessary information. _(Michael Zronek)_
- Further improved the Java binding such as wording and documentation. _(Michael Zronek)_

### Rust

- Add the `elektra-sys` crate which contains raw bindings to libelektra for Rust. _(Philipp Gackstatter)_
- Add the `elektra` crate which contains safe wrapper methods for the raw bindings. The crate contains bindings for the low-level API, which means that the data types `Key` and `KeySet` can now safely be used from Rust. The Rust version of the API has been designed to take advantage of Rust's type system and to be in accordance with the memory safety of Rust. For instance, the Key has been divided into `StringKey` and `BinaryKey`, to prevent type mismatches at compile-time. With the binding for `KDB`, one can take advantage of the elektra ecosystem from Rust. See the [Readme](../../src/bindings/rust/README.md) for more. _(Philipp Gackstatter)_
- Rewrote the `KDBError` to follow the specification fully and in particular allow catching out of memory errors by catching resource errors. _(Philipp Gackstatter)_
- Added a `keyset!` macro to easily create a keyset with many keys in a single invocation. _(Philipp Gackstatter)_

## Tools

- `KDB_EXEC_PATH`, which can be used to add further external tools to `kdb`, now supports `:` to separate paths.
  `kdb list-tools` and `run_env` were improved to take advantage of this. _(Markus Raab)_
- Checks for `kdbCommit` have been added to [kdb plugin-check](../help/kdb-plugin-check.md). _(Vid Leskovar)_
- Added PID file config setting for kdb-run-rest-frontend _(Markus Raab)_
- Added `kdb meta-show` command which prints out all metadata along with its values for a given key. _(Michael Zronek)_
- Removed `kdb vset` as it does not properly put metadata to the spec namespace. _(Michael Zronek)_
- Renamed kdb plugin commands following a hierarchical structure. `kdb info` is now `kdb plugin-info`, `kdb check` is now `kdb plugin-check` and `kdb list` is now `kdb plugin-list`. We also removed the obsolete `kdb fstab`. _(Philipp Gackstatter)_
- Renamed kdb meta commands:
  - `kdb getmeta` is now `kdb meta-get`
  - `kdb lsmeta` is now `kdb meta-ls`
  - `kdb showmeta` is now `kdb meta-show`
  - `kdb rmmeta` is now `kdb meta-rm`
  - `kdb setmeta` is now `kdb meta-set` _(Philipp Gackstatter)_
- Fix test tool `gen-gpg-testkey` by giving a narrower GPG key description. Fixes mismatches with existing GPG keys that contain "elektra.org" as e-mail address. _(Peter Nirschl)_
- `kdb list-commands` and `kdb plugins-list` now sort their output in an alphabetical order _(Anton Hößl)_
- `kdb plugin-list` does now mention in the helptext that with option `-v` the output is sorted by the plugin status _(Anton Hößl)_
- `kdb import`, `kdb export` and `kdb editor` now search the plugin database for suitig plugins so it's now possible to run `kdb export /hello json` instead of having to specify the plugin for the desired format directly. _(Anton Hößl)_
- `get` and `mount`: Remove dependency on `kdbprivate.h` _(Philipp Gackstatter)_

## Scripts

- We structured the [scripts](/scripts). _(Markus Raab)_
- Removed the scripts

  - `scripts/elektra-merge`,
  - `scripts/elektra-mount`,
  - `scripts/elektra-umount`,
  - `convert-fstab`,
  - `convert-hosts`,
  - `convert-inittab`,
  - `convert-users`,
  - `scripts/benchmark_libsplit.sh`,
  - `scripts/zsh` and
  - `example-xorg`. _(Markus Raab)_

- Renamed `scripts/run_dev_env` to `scripts/dev/run_env`. _(Markus Raab)_
- The script [`draw-all-plugins`](../../scripts/dev/draw-all-plugins) now also works properly, if the repository path contains space characters. _(René Schwaiger)_
- The script [`link-checker`](../../scripts/link-checker) now deduplicates the list of links before checking them. The timeout and amount of retries was also reduced.
  Lastly the script now supports a whitelist. Any link stored in [`tests/linkchecker.whitelist`](../../tests/linkchecker.whitelist) will not be checked. _(Klemens Böswirth)_
- We removed a script used to compare the runtime performance of YAML plugins. _(René Schwaiger)_
- Cleanup: separation of dev, admin and completion scripts. _(Markus Raab, Rene Schwaiger)_
- Pre-commit hook `pre-commit-check-formatting` now lives in [`scripts/dev/pre-commit-check-formatting`](../../scripts/dev/pre-commit-check-formatting). _(Klemens Böswirth)_
- The new script `reformat-javascript` formats the JavaScript code of the repository using the tool [`prettier`](https://prettier.io). _(René Schwaiger)_
- We renamed
  - the script `reformat-source` to `reformat-c`, and
  - the script `reformat-shfmt` to `reformat-shell`. _(René Schwaiger)_
- The script [cmake-format](../../scripts/dev/reformat-cmake) now requires `cmake-format` 0.6. _(René Schwaiger)_
- The new script `reformat-java` formats the Java code in the repository using [`clang-format`](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangFormat.html). _(René Schwaiger)_
- The [Markdown Shell Recorder][] now also works correctly on FreeBSD. _(René Schwaiger)_

## Documentation

- Added a tutorial on how to write language bindings. Visit our new [README](../tutorials/language-bindings.md).
  _(Michael Zronek, Raphael Gruber, Philipp Gackstatter)_
- Clarified subtyping in the language bindings tutorial. _(Michael Zronek)_
- A [second tutorial](../tutorials/highlevel-bindings.md) on writing bindings for the high-level API was created as well. _(Klemens Böswirth, Raphael Gruber)_
- Added [info](../../src/plugins/xerces/README.md) on how to include xerces plugin with homebrew installation. _(Anton Hößl)_
- The [compile instructions](../COMPILE.md) do not assume that you use `make` or `gcc` to build Elektra anymore. _(René Schwaiger)_
- Add hints about reformatting with docker. _(Dominic Jäger)_
- Add instructions about sourcing on FreeBSD. _(Dominic Jäger)_
- Add information on debuggers to main testing documentation. _(Dominic Jäger)_
- Added design decision for error code implementations. _(Michael Zronek)_
- Fixed some typos and links in the documentation and add new iterate example. _(Philipp Gackstatter)_
- Clarified warnings metadata in the [error-handling guideline](../dev/error-handling.md). _(Michael Zronek)_
- We fixed minor spelling mistakes in the documentation. _(René Schwaiger)_
- Corrected buildserver documentation. _(Djordje Bulatovic)_
- Add merge library into kdbset example. _(Dominic Jäger)_
- We updated links for the INI parsing library Nickel. _(René Schwaiger)_
- Added some information about [contributing](../../.github/CONTRIBUTING.md) to Elektra. _(Hani Torabi)_

## Tests

- We changed how the `formatting test` detects code differences. This update should get rid of transient errors as [reported here](https://issues.libelektra.org/2927#issuecomment-528058641). _(René Schwaiger)_
- We disabled the test for the conversion engine. For more information, please take a look at [issue #3086](https://issues.libelektra.org/3086). _(René Schwaiger)_
- We disabled the test `testmod_zeromqsend` from the command `kdb run_all`, since it caused timeouts in high load scenarios. _(Mihael Pranjić)_
- The (Markdown) [Shell Recorder](../../tests/shell/shell_recorder/README.md) now prints the protocol for a failed test, even if the test modified the database permanently. _(René Schwaiger)_
- We rerun ctest twice to ignore temporary build failures. _(Markus Raab)_

## Build

### CMake

- `kdbtypes.h` is now generated directly via a CMake `configure_file` call. _(Klemens Böswirth)_
- The variable `ELEKTRA_STAT_ST_SIZE_F` now contains the correct format specifier for the `st_size` member of the `stat` struct on macOS. _(René Schwaiger)_
- We simplified and unified the CMake code for the Shell Tests and the [Shell Recorder](../../tests/shell/shell_recorder). _(René Schwaiger)_
- CMake now prints warnings about missing man pages. _(René Schwaiger)_
- The build system does not update a man page in the folder [doc/man](../man) any more, if ronn only changed the creation date of the man page. _(René Schwaiger)_

### Compilation

- We now have a [setup for proper symbol versioning](../dev/symbol-versioning.md). _(Klemens Böswirth)_
- We do not use implicit typing in the code of the `conditionals` and `yamlcpp` plugin any more. After this update, the code compiles without any warnings, even though we now use the compiler switch `-Wconversion`. _(René Schwaiger)_
- JNA and JNI are not built concurrently anymore to avoid [dependency resolution fails](https://jira.apache.org/jira/browse/MDEP-518). _(Michael Zronek)_

### Docker

- Added [Dockerfile for Ubuntu Bionic](../../scripts/docker/ubuntu/bionic/Dockerfile) _(Djordje Bulatovic)_
- We removed all Haskell packages from the Dockerfiles in the folder [scripts/docker](../../scripts/docker). _(René Schwaiger)_
- We added a basic [Dockerfile for Arch Linux](../../scripts/docker/arch/Dockerfile). _(René Schwaiger)_
- We updated the [Dockerfile for Alpine Linux](../../scripts/docker/alpine). _(René Schwaiger)_

### Vagrant

- We added a [Vagrantfile](../../scripts/vagrant/freebsd/README.md) for a virtual machine based on FreeBSD 12. _(René Schwaiger)_

### Other

- The reformatting script now checks that the correct version of `cmake-format` is used. _(Klemens Böswirth, René Schwaiger)_
- Improved various error messages and synchronized documentations. _(Michael Zronek)_
- Improved `range` plugin error message. _(Michael Zronek)_
- Improved error codes documentation to clarify the hierarchy for developers. _(Michael Zronek)_
- Release notes now use git's union merge driver. _(Dominic Jäger)_
- Updated asciinema recording to correctly use `sudo`. _(Michael Zronek)_
- Add pkg-config file for kdbmerge. _(Raphael Gruber)_

## Infrastructure

### Cirrus

- The `🔗 Check` build job now merges PRs before checking links. _(Klemens Böswirth)_
- We enabled logging in the build job `🍎 Clang`. This update makes sure that Elektra’s logging code compiles without warnings on macOS. _(René Schwaiger)_
- All macOS build jobs now use Xcode `11.1` instead of Xcode `10.1`. _(René Schwaiger)_
- We removed all non-POSIX shell code from the [Cirrus configuration file](../../.cirrus.yml). _(René Schwaiger)_
- The macOS build jobs now use Ruby `2.6`. _(René Schwaiger)_
- We do not call `ninja` directly anymore. Instead we use `cmake --build`. This has the advantage that we do not have to care about the Generator used by CMake. _(René Schwaiger)_
- We added the build job `😈 ASAN`, which builds and executes Elektra on FreeBSD with enabled [AddressSanitizer](https://github.com/google/sanitizers/wiki/AddressSanitizer). _(René Schwaiger)_
- We now store common commands in one place at the top of the configuration file. This makes it easier to selectively disable certain build jobs. _(René Schwaiger)_
- The new job `📚 Check` checks

  - that the [man pages](../man) are up-to-date, and
  - that building the PDF version of the Doxygen documentation works. _(René Schwaiger)_

- The new build job `🐧 Fedora` builds and tests Elektra on Fedora Linux. _(René Schwaiger)_

### Jenkins

- We upgraded all servers to Buster. _(Markus Raab)_
- Jenkins does not auto cancel build jobs of the `master` branch anymore. _(René Schwaiger)_
- Updated xUnit plugin in Jenkinsfile. _(Djordje Bulatovic)_

### Restyled

- [Restyled](https://restyled.io) now also formats Markdown files with [`prettier`](https://prettier.io). _(René Schwaiger)_

### Travis

- The build job `🍏 GCC` now uses the [Travis Homebrew addon](https://docs.travis-ci.com/user/installing-dependencies/#installing-packages-on-macos) to install dependencies. _(René Schwaiger)_
- We now build and test Elektra on Ubuntu `18.04` (Bionic Beaver) instead of Ubuntu `16.04` (Xenial Xerus). _(René Schwaiger)_

## Website

The website is generated from the repository, so all information about
plugins, bindings and tools are always up-to-date. Furthermore, we changed:

- Renamed the sub menu _Getting Started_ in the menu _Documentation_ to _About Elektra_ and removed the sub-sub-menus _Compiling_, _Installation_ and _Tutorials_. These sub-sub-menus are now sub-menus of _Documentation_. A new sub menu labeled _Get Started_ added to the menu _Documentation_ with some newcomer-friendly information. Renamed the _Getting Started_ sub menu in _Development_ to _Contribute to Elektra_. The green button on the main page is routed to the new _Get Started_ page. _(Hani Torabi)_
- The website now lives in the folder [website](/src/tools/website) to avoid confusion with the REST backend of the Web-UI. _(Markus Raab)_
- Improve main page of website, restructure getting started. _(Markus Raab)_

## Outlook

We are currently working on following topics:

- Elektrify KDE _(Dardan Haxhimustafa)_ and _(Felix Resch)_
- Elektrify LCDproc _(Klemens Böswirth)_ and _(Jakob Fischer)_
- Reduce the number of merge conflicts in 3-way merge. _(Dominic Jäger)_
- Go bindings and improved Web-UI _(Raphael Gruber)_
- Improved Error handling _(Michael Zronek)_
- New default storage _(René Schwaiger)_ and _(Jakob Fischer)_
- Shell completion _(Ulrike Schäfer)_
- Improve Elektra developer experience _(Hani Torabi)_
- Ansible bindings _(Thomas Waser)_
- Plugin interface improvements _(Vid Leskovar)_

## Statistics

We closed [75 issues](https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/libelektra/milestone/21?closed=1) for this release.

About 29 authors changed 1651 files with 82267 insertions(+) and 41690 deletions(-) in 1623 commits.

Thanks to all authors for making this release possible!

## Finished Thesis

- [Klemens Böswirth](https://www.libelektra.org/ftp/elektra/publications/boeswirth2019highlevel.pdf):
  We explore the feasibility of using Elektra in a real-world project. We focused especially on using
  the high-level API with code-generation. In the thesis, we implemented new versions of LCDproc, one
  with the low-level API and one with the high-level API. Then we did some benchmarks to compare them.
  Our results indicate, that Elektra is very much usable in real-world projects. However, we also found
  that there is still potential for further optimizations.
- Mihael Pranjić:
  We design a binary storage format for Elektra's data structures and implement a [cache plugin](https://www.libelektra.org/plugins/cache) based on the format. The cache plugin leverages the `mmap()` system call to read and write data. Our cache implementation for Elektra's data structures makes the access to the KDB more than 80 times faster for larger data sets. The penalty for cache misses is below 20 percent for reasonably sized data sets.

## Join the Initiative!

We welcome new contributors!
Read [here](https://www.libelektra.org/devgettingstarted/ideas) about how to get started.

As first step, you could give us feedback about these release notes.
Contact us via our [issue tracker](https://issues.libelektra.org).

## Get the Release!

You can download the release from [here](https://www.libelektra.org/ftp/elektra/releases/elektra-0.9.1.tar.gz)
or [GitHub](https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/ftp/blob/master/releases/elektra-0.9.1.tar.gz?raw=true)

The [hashsums are:](https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/ftp/blob/master/releases/elektra-0.9.1.tar.gz.hashsum?raw=true)

- author: mpranj
- file: elektra-0.9.1.tar.gz
- size: 7534156
- md5sum: 42ff587adb7c3f15807ac4dae6722261
- sha1: bf250260a4efa20e5444f0a7f0027430bc7aa8a0
- sha256: df1d2ec1b4db9c89c216772f0998581a1cbb665e295ff9a418549360bb42f758

The release tarball is also available signed by Mihael Pranjic using GnuPG from
[here](https://www.libelektra.org/ftp/elektra/releases/elektra-0.9.1.tar.gz.gpg) or on
[GitHub](https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/ftp/blob/master/releases/elektra-0.9.1.tar.gz.gpg?raw=true)

Already built API documentation can be found [here](https://doc.libelektra.org/api/0.9.1/html/)
or on [GitHub](https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/doc/tree/master/api/0.9.1).

## Stay tuned!

Subscribe to the
[RSS feed](https://www.libelektra.org/news/feed.rss)
to always get the release notifications.

If you also want to participate, or for any questions and comments
please contact us via our issue tracker [on GitHub](http://issues.libelektra.org).

[Permalink to this NEWS entry](https://www.libelektra.org/news/0.9.1-release)

For more information, see [https://libelektra.org](https://libelektra.org)

Best regards,
[Elektra Initiative](https://www.libelektra.org/developers/authors)
