# 0.8.20 Release (NOT YET RELEASED)

RELEASE NOTES ARE IN PREPARATION.
RELEASE DID NOT HAPPEN YET.

- guid: 547d48e2-c044-4a8e-9d32-ca6b6fb914d9
- author: Markus Raab
- pubDate: Fri, 20 Oct 2017 21:08:07 +0200
- shortDesc:



## What is Elektra?

Elektra serves as a universal and secure framework to access configuration
settings in a global, hierarchical key database.
For more information visit https://www.libelektra.org

## Highlights

In 8188 commits, 1698 files were changed with 89958 insertions(+), 20191 deletions(-).

- libelektra.org: source code release of website, server managed by libelektra
- plugin+bindings for Haskell and Ruby
- improved shell completion
- new plugins: yamlcpp, camel, mini, date, file, range,
               multifile, xerces, ipaddr

### <<ONE POINT PER HIGHLIGHT>> (TODO, not yet done)

### libelektra.org

Unfortunately this release is delayed.  The reason for this is, that
our community server was compromised and we needed to reinstall everything
from scratch.

We took advantage of the situation, and reinstalled everything properly
managed by [puppet-libelektra](https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/puppet-libelektra).

Thanks to Bernhard Denner, for rescuing us from the difficult situation.

TODO, not yet written

All our pages are now available via https.

  (was already announced earlier, but this is the first time
   that a release of Elektra includes the source code of
   the website)

The backend uses Elektra itself.

Thanks to Marvin Mall for the new website.

#### Haskell and Ruby

Ruby includes libtools bindings.
Examples for Ruby were added.
TODO src/bindings/swig/ruby/examples

Haskell has generic CMake and C Code so that Elektra plugins can be written
exclusively in Haskell.

TODO src/bindings/haskell/README.md plugins/haskell

Several Haskell examples exist in src/bindings/haskell/examples/

### Shell Completion

The new tool `kdb complete` suggests how to complete an Elektra path.
It considers mountpoints and bookmarks correctly.

Thanks to Armin Wurzinger.

The new `kdb complete` tool is now used for zsh and fish bindings.

Thanks to Sebastian Bachmann and René Schwaiger.

### New Plugins

TODO: file, range, ipaddr, yamlcpp, camel, mini

The date plugin supports validation of dates according to three standards:

* `RFC2822`
* `ISO8601`
* `POSIX`

The [multifile plugin](https://www.libelektra.org/plugins/multifile)
allows us to integrate many configuration files via globbing with
a single mount command. It supports `.d` configuration directories
as often used today.

The [xerces plugin](https://www.libelektra.org/plugins/xerces)
supplants the [xmltool plugin](https://www.libelektra.org/plugins/xmltool)
and allows us to use XML files not following a specific schemata.
Attributes are mapped to Elektra's metadata, multiple keys with the
same names are mapped to arrays.


## Documentation

- extended [FAQ](/doc/help/elektra-faq.md)
- Added "Hello, Elektra" and logging tutorial,
  thanks to René Schwaiger
- Christoph Weber (@krit0n) improved some tutorials
- pass options to PDFLaTeX compiler,
  thanks to René Schwaiger
- small fixes, thanks to Dominik Hofer
- fix many spelling mistakes, use American english, fix formatting,
  fix+add links, unify title style, fix code blocks, add titles,
  fix PDF manual
  thanks to René Schwaiger

## Features

- conditionals: allow multiple assigns and conditions
- jna bindings: greatly improved, now uses maven+doxygen
  thanks to Armin Wurzinger
- improve curlget plugin, is now able to upload configuration files
  thanks to Thomas Waser and Peter Nirschl (CMake fixes)
- kdb rmmeta, thanks to Bernhard Denner
- fcrypt: major improvements and output list available GPG keys when config is missing,
  thanks to Peter Nirschl
- added useful scripts:
  - [mount-list-all-files](https://master.libelektra.org/doc/help/kdb-mount-list-all-files.md)
  - [mountpoint-info](https://master.libelektra.org/doc/help/kdb-mountpoint-info.md)
  - [stash](https://master.libelektra.org/doc/help/kdb-stash.md)
  - [backup](https://master.libelektra.org/doc/help/kdb-backup.md)
  - [restore](https://master.libelektra.org/doc/help/kdb-restore.md)
  - [check-env-dep](https://master.libelektra.org/doc/help/kdb-check-env-dep.md)
  - [change-resolver](https://master.libelektra.org/doc/help/kdb-change-resolver.md)
  - [change-storage](https://master.libelektra.org/doc/help/kdb-change-storage.md)
- limit min/max depth for `kdb ls` (`-mM`)
- base64 also works as filter for binary data (not just encrypted data),
  thanks to René Schwaiger
- csvstorage: compatibility with RFC 4180, thanks to Thomas Waser
- gitresolver: improvements and update libgit version, thanks to Thomas Waser
- curlget: also allow uploading of configuration files, thanks to Thomas Waser

## Compatibility

As always, the ABI and API of kdb.h is fully compatible, i.e. programs
compiled against an older 0.8 version of Elektra will continue to work
(ABI) and you will be able to recompile programs without errors (API).

We added explicit to some constructors in libtools and internally moved
some typedefs. ModulesPluginDatabase now has protected members (instead
of private). This might break weird code, but should not affect binary
compatibility.

TODO check:
- new files?
- INI meta, line continuation now tab?
- make scripts work on macOS (readlink and sed),
  thanks to Armin Wurzinger and René Schwaiger
- fcrypt config parameters?
- generalized error #60, "invalid line encountered"
- added new errors #164 - #187
- added private headerfiles `kdbglobal.h`, `kdbinvoke.h`

## Maintainers

- LICENSE.md now contains BSD 3-Clause License without any additional non-license text
- AUTHORS renamed to AUTHORS.md
- NEWS.md is now a generated file containing all news concatenated
- CMake 2.8.8 is no longer supported, 3.0 is now needed
- fix macOS RPATH, remove old policies, thanks to René Schwaiger
- new option BUILD_DOCSET to build DocSet
- option ENABLE_OPTIMIZATIONS should be turned off (experimental hash map support)
- add TARGET_TOOL_DATA_FOLDER for installation of tool data (for rest-backend and rest-frontend)

## Development

- added macros, thanks to René Schwaiger:
 - ELEKTRA_NOT_NULL is an assertion against null pointers
 - ELEKTRA_MALLOC_ERROR sets an error when allocation failed
 - ELEKTRA_STRINGIFY to quote a macro value
 - ELEKTRA_PLUGIN_STATUS_ERROR ELEKTRA_PLUGIN_STATUS_SUCCESS ELEKTRA_PLUGIN_STATUS_NO_UPDATE
   for return values of plugins.
- ELEKTRA_STRINGIFY used throughout, thanks to René Schwaiger
- use `(void)` instead of `()` (added `-Wstrict-prototypes`)
- new positions for global plugins,
  thanks to Mihael Pranjic
- Kurt Micheli added generateKeySet to randomly generate large key sets.
- add vagrant and docker support, thanks to Christoph Weber (@krit0n)
- improve support for CLion, netbeans and oclint
- portability improvements for logger, thanks to René Schwaiger
- metadata consistency check within source repo, thanks to Thomas Waser
- CMake: require version 3.0
- ELEKTRA_PLUGIN_EXPORT accepts macro as argument
- Fallthroughs in switch statements are now marked with FALLTHROUGH
- introduce print_result to unify test output, thanks to René Schwaiger
- export `validateKey` as preparation for type plugin

## Other

- OPMPHM preparation work, thanks to Kurt Micheli
  (For this release, please keep ENABLE_OPTIMIZATIONS turned off.
  Currently it increases memory usage, without being faster.)
- kdb: errors are more colorful, add infos to report issues,
       use `$EDITOR` if `sensible-editor` and `editor` is not found.
       René Schwaiger fixed preposition and format of the messages.
- added Spanish translation for qt-gui
  thanks to AdanGQ (@pixelead0)
- DBUS support for qt-gui (listening to configuration changes):
  qt-gui gets a viewer-mode where configuration settings are immediately updated
  via DBus notifications, thanks to Raffael Pancheri
- genconf: let augeas list all lenses
- improvements for CentOS and Debian Packages,
  thanks to Sebastian Bachmann
- travis improvements, fixes, and many build variants added, thanks to Mihael Pranjic and René Schwaiger
- ronn now always uses UTF-8 as encoded and is no longer required
  as essential dependency to get man pages, thanks to René Schwaiger
- GitHub now recognizes that we have a BSD licence, thanks to René Schwaiger
- Uninstallation Script also uninstalls directories and python files, thanks to René Schwaiger
- catch signals for `kdb` tools to print errors on crashes.

## Quality

- fixed all remaining ASAN problems, thanks to René Schwaiger and Armin Wurzinger
  (some tests are excluded when compiled with ASAN)
- fix many compilation warnings, thanks to René Schwaiger and Armin Wurzinger
- fixed many potential bound errors, thanks to René Schwaiger
- fixed warnings of Clang's static analyzers, thanks to René Schwaiger
- fixed cppcheck warnings, thanks to Armin Wurzinger
- fixed strict prototypes, thanks to Armin Wurzinger
- fixed and use scan-build (clang)
- fixed potential memory leaks on errors
- added assertions

## Fixes

- kdb file: never print errors, thanks to René Schwaiger
- plugin mathcheck: fixed regex #1094, thanks to Thomas Waser
- dbus: properly do unref and document how to integrate DBus, thanks to Kai-Uwe Behrmann
- plugin desktop: fix crash if DESKTOP_SESSION is missing
- shell-recorder: many fixes and improvements, thanks to Thomas Waser and René Schwaiger
- fix getopt positional parameters, thanks to Armin Wurzinger
- plugin fcrypt: fixes in file name handling to make leaks less likely
  (still needs tmpfs to be secure!), thanks to Peter Nirschl
- jni: fix segfaults on errors
- type: reject integers if garbage follows
- kdb: fix memleak when listing plugins
- augeas plugin: error messages improved, export genconf (for WebUI to find all lenses)
- plugin csvstorage: fix double quotes+line numbers, thanks to Thomas Waser
- many spelling fixes and fix typo in source of qt-gui:
  thanks to klemens (ka7)
- dpkg, fix file leakage, thanks to Armin Wurzinger
- plugin line: only skip parentKey if present
- plugin resolver: avoid failure after commit for files that cannot be removed
- plugin simpleini: handle more errors, make format parameter more robust
  thanks to Bernhard Denner
- plugin crypto: fix compilation errors for openssl versions on Debian 9, thanks to Peter Nirschl
- kdb-mv: fail without keys also in recurse mode
- fix bashism, thanks to Armin Wurzinger
- qtgui: fix crash on unhandled exception on binary values, thanks to Raffael Pancheri

## Get It!

You can download the release from
[here](https://www.libelektra.org/ftp/elektra/releases/elektra-0.8.<<VERSION>>.tar.gz)
and also [here on GitHub](https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/ftp/tree/master/releases/elektra-0.8.<<VERSION>>.tar.gz)

<<`scripts/generate-hashsums`>>

This release tarball now is also available
[signed by me using gpg](https://www.libelektra.org/ftp/elektra/releases/elektra-0.8.<<VERSION>>.tar.gz.gpg)

Already built API-Docu can be found [here](https://doc.libelektra.org/api/0.8.<<VERSION>>/html/)


## Stay tuned!

Subscribe to the
[RSS feed](https://doc.libelektra.org/news/feed.rss)
to always get the release notifications.

For any questions and comments, please contact the
[Mailing List](https://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/registry-list)
the issue tracker [on GitHub](http://git.libelektra.org/issues)
or by email elektra@markus-raab.org.

[Permalink to this NEWS entry](https://doc.libelektra.org/news/<<UID>>.html)

For more information, see [http://libelektra.org](http://libelektra.org)

Best regards,
Markus



