doc/tutorials/dockerd-specification.md, before:

# How to Write a Specification in Elektra for dockerd

## Overview

### Introduction

In this tutorial you will learn how to interactively use the `SpecElektra` specification
language and `kdb` to write a configuration specification for [dockerd](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/dockerd/).

### What you should already know

- Already know how to write a [specification](specification.md)

### What you’ll learn

- how to create and mount a specification using `kdb`
- how to add keys with different types, defaults, enums, array specifications, wildcard specifications and examples to your specification and how to validate them

### What you'll do

- use `kdb` to create and mount a specification for [dockerd](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/dockerd/)
- define defaults, array / wildcard specifications, examples and checks for keys in the validation
- use the specification as a starting point for customizing the configuration of installed applications

### Scope

In this tutorial we will introduce a possible specification for [dockerd](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/dockerd/).
Using `kdb` we will configure the specification.

> NOTE: As the specification for dockerd is quite big we will only present a sample for the above mentioned metakeys and link to a full specification [dockerd-full-spec](../../examples/spec/dockerd.ini).

## Getting Started

Before we start just an overview of the structure:

- Specification file location: `~/.config/dockerd/dockerd-daemon.ni`
- Parent specification key: `spec:/sw/dockerd/dockerd/#0/current`

## Specification Types (values)

`Elektra` supports multiple types which leads to a more flexible specification.
See [type plugin](../../src/plugins/type/README.md) for information about all the types that are supported.

## Mount Setup

### Step 1: Mount dockerd specification

First you need to mount a specification file, in this case `dockerd-daemon.ni` to the `spec:/` namespace.
You can define the path inside the `spec:/` namespace as `/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current`, refer to
[the documentation](https://www.libelektra.org/tutorials/integration-of-your-c-application) to find out more about constructing the name.

```sh
sudo kdb mount "$PWD/.config/dockerd/dockerd-daemon.ni" spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current ni
```

> NOTE: If you encounter any error saying that you have already mounted some specification with the same name you can run
> `sudo kdb umount spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current` and rerun the above command.

> Note: ni is the format which is used for the specification in the file.
> You can also choose to use json, then you need use yajl instead of ni.

### Step 2: Define a mountpoint

Next you can define, that this specification uses a specific mountpoint for a concrete application configuration.
So you can say the concrete configuration should be written to `dockerd-daemon.ni`.

```sh
kdb meta-set spec:/sw/dockerd/dockerd/#0/current mountpoint ~/.config/dockerd/daemon.ni
```

Your `dockerd-daemon.ni` file should now look something like this:

```sh
cat $(kdb file spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current)

# ;Ni1
# ; Generated by the ni plugin using Elektra (see libelektra.org).

# =

# []
#  meta:/mountpoint = $PWD/.config/dockerd/daemon.ni
```

### Step 3: Do a specification mount

```sh
sudo kdb spec-mount /sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current ni
```

This specification mount makes sure that the paths where the concrete configuration should be (`daemon.ni`)
are ready to fulfill our specification (`dockerd-daemon.ni`).
Be aware that different files get mounted for different namespaces.
You've a specification file (`dockerd-daemon.ni`) for the `spec`-namespace and three files (`daemon.ni`) on different locations
for the `dir`- `user`- and `system`-namespaces.

You can see the files by providing the namespace as prefix to the `kdb file` command:

```sh
kdb file system:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current
# $PWD/.config/dockerd/daemon.ni

kdb file user:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current
# $PWD/$PWD/.config/daemon.ni

kdb file dir:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current
# $PWD/$PWD/.config/daemon.ni
```

> NOTE: The $PWD should equal the PWD where you run `sudo kdb mount "$PWD/.config/dockerd/dockerd-daemon.ni" spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current ni`.

> **_Note_**: The files only exist, when configuration values are stored there,
> i.e. they are created on the first `kdb set` and removed with the last `kdb rm`.

For more information about namespaces in Elektra please see [here](https://www.libelektra.org/man-pages/elektra-namespaces),
a tutorial about the topic is available [here](https://www.libelektra.org/tutorials/namespaces).

## Writing specification for keys

In this example for `dockerd` we will be using 3 types of specifications:

- Simple specification (type and description)
- Enum specifications (for keys were only a set of possible options can be used)
- Array and wildcard specifications (for keys where a list of possible options can be used)

As the `dockerd` specification is big we will just present one of each of the above mentioned specification types.

> NOTE: In Elektra we use `/` instead of `-` to seperate key names.
> This results in a hierarchical structure of key names.
> This commands will automatically store the specification in the `dockerd-daemon.ni` specification file.

### Array specification

```ini
[data/root]
meta:/type = string
meta:/description = Root directory of persistent Docker state
meta:/default = /var/lib/docker
```

In order to get the above specification we will need the following commands:

```sh
kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/data/root type "string"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/data/root description "Root directory of persistent Docker state"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/data/root default "/var/lib/docker"
```

In case no `data/root` key gets configured the value `/var/lib/docker` is used.

Let us verify that the metakeys have been set correctly:

```sh
cat $(kdb file spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current)

# ;Ni1
# ; Generated by the ni plugin using Elektra (see libelektra.org).

# data/root =
#  =

# [data/root]
#  meta:/type = string
#  meta:/description = Root directory of persistent Docker state
#  meta:/default = /var/lib/docker

# []
#  meta:/mountpoint = $PWD/.config/dockerd/daemon.ni
```

### Enum specification (for keys were only a set of possible options can be used)

```ini
[default/cgroupns/mode]
meta:/description = Default mode for containers cgroup namespace
meta:/default = private
meta:/check/enum = #1
meta:/check/enum/#0 = host
meta:/check/enum/#1 = private
```

In order to get the above specification we will need the following commands:

```sh
kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/cgroupns/mode description "Default mode for containers cgroup namespace"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/cgroupns/mode default "private"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/cgroupns/mode check/enum "#1"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/cgroupns/mode check/enum/#0 "host"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/cgroupns/mode check/enum/#1 "private"
```

With this configuration we have managed to allow two possible values for `default/cgroupns/mode`.
The values are `host` and `private`.
The default value if we do not set any configuration is `private`.

Let us verify that the metakeys have been set correctly:

```sh
cat $(kdb file spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current)

# ;Ni1
# ; Generated by the ni plugin using Elektra (see libelektra.org).

# default/cgroupns/mode =
# data/root =
#  =

# [default/cgroupns/mode]
#  meta:/check/enum/#0 = host
#  meta:/check/enum/#1 = private
#  meta:/description = Default mode for containers cgroup namespace
#  meta:/default = private
#  meta:/check/enum = #1

# [data/root]
#  meta:/type = string
#  meta:/description = Root directory of persistent Docker state
#  meta:/default = /var/lib/docker

# []
#  meta:/mountpoint = /home/tmakar/.config/dockerd/daemon.ni
```

### Wildcard specifications (for keys where a list of possible options can be used)

```ini
[default/ulimits/_]
meta:/type = long
meta:/description = Default ulimits for containers
meta:/example = 64000
```

For this specification we want to allow an arbitrary number of `default ulimits`.
The name of the `ulimits` does not matter but all should have the same metakeys.

In order to get the above specification we will need following commands:

```sh
kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/ulimits/_ type "long"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/ulimits/_ description "Default ulimits for containers"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/ulimits/_ example "64000"
```

The above specification will allow us to create any name below the `default/ulimits` key.
The value needs to be a string.
The sample value is `64000`.

Let us verify that the metakeys have been set correctly:

```sh
cat $(kdb file spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current)

# ;Ni1
# ; Generated by the ni plugin using Elektra (see libelektra.org).

# default/ulimits/_ =
# default/cgroupns/mode =
# data/root =
#  =

# [default/ulimits/_]
#  meta:/type = long
#  meta:/example = 64000
#  meta:/description = Default ulimits for containers

# [default/cgroupns/mode]
#  meta:/check/enum/#0 = host
#  meta:/check/enum/#1 = private
#  meta:/description = Default mode for containers cgroup namespace
#  meta:/default = private
#  meta:/check/enum = #1

# [data/root]
#  meta:/type = string
#  meta:/description = Root directory of persistent Docker state
#  meta:/default = /var/lib/docker

# []
#  meta:/mountpoint = /home/tmakar/.config/dockerd/daemon.ni
```

### Array specifications (for keys where a list of possible options can be used)

```ini
[default/address/pools]
meta:/array/min = 0
meta:/description = Default address pools for node specific local networks (list)

[default/address/pools/#/base]
meta:/type = string
meta:/description = Ip address (ipv4) + subnet
meta:/example = 172.30.0.0/16

[default/address/pools/#/size]
meta:/type = short
meta:/description = Number of ip addresses in this pool with base
meta:/example = 24
```

The specification above shows the use of an array specification with the `#` character.
We define the array to have a minimum value of `0` and arbitrary max length.
We use `type`, `description` and `example` as metakeys on the keys beneath each array element.

This configuration above assures that we can configure `pools` with `base` and `size`.

It prevents a configuration like:

```ini
default/address/pools/#0/size = "test"
```

It will fail as `default/address/pools/#/size` is required to be of type `short` when set.

In order to get the above specification we will need following commands:

```sh
kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/address/pools array/min "0"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/address/pools description "Default address pools for node specific local networks (list)"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/address/pools/#/base type "string"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/address/pools/#/base description "Ip address (ipv4) + subnet"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/address/pools/#/base example "172.30.0.0/16"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/address/pools/#/size type "short"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/address/pools/#/size description "Number of ip addresses in this pool with base"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/address/pools/#/size example "24"
```

The above specification defines that we can create array elements and each can have `base` or `size`.

## Final specification code

Your specification should be complete now!
After adding all the keys that are necessary for our application, your specification should look something like this:

```ini
cat $(kdb file spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current)

# ;Ni1
# ; Generated by the ni plugin using Elektra (see libelektra.org).

# default/address/pools/#/base =
# default/ulimits/_ =
# default/cgroupns/mode =
# default/address/pools/#/size =
# data/root =
# default/address/pools =
#  =

# [default/address/pools/#/base]
#  meta:/type = string
#  meta:/example = 172.30.0.0/16
#  meta:/description = Ip address (ipv4) + subnet

# [default/ulimits/_]
#  meta:/type = long
#  meta:/example = 64000
#  meta:/description = Default ulimits for containers

# [default/cgroupns/mode]
#  meta:/check/enum/#0 = host
#  meta:/check/enum/#1 = private
#  meta:/description = Default mode for containers cgroup namespace
#  meta:/default = private
#  meta:/check/enum = #1

# [default/address/pools/#/size]
#  meta:/type = short
#  meta:/example = 24
#  meta:/description = Number of ip addresses in this pool with base

# [data/root]
#  meta:/type = string
#  meta:/description = Root directory of persistent Docker state
#  meta:/default = /var/lib/docker

# []
#  meta:/mountpoint = /home/tmakar/.config/dockerd/daemon.ni

# [default/address/pools]
#  meta:/description = Default address pools for node specific local networks (list)
#  meta:/array/min = 0
```

## Appendix (full specification)

The full specification can be viewed at [dockerd-full-spec](../../examples/spec/dockerd.ini).

Commit message:

doc(dockerd,tutorial): add section for full spec example import

doc/tutorials/dockerd-specification.md, after:

# How to Write a Specification in Elektra for dockerd

## Overview

### Introduction

In this tutorial you will learn how to interactively use the `SpecElektra` specification
language and `kdb` to write a configuration specification for [dockerd](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/dockerd/).

### What you should already know

- Already know how to write a [specification](specification.md)

### What you’ll learn

- how to create and mount a specification using `kdb`
- how to add keys with different types, defaults, enums, array specifications, wildcard specifications and examples to your specification and how to validate them

### What you'll do

- use `kdb` to create and mount a specification for [dockerd](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/dockerd/)
- define defaults, array / wildcard specifications, examples and checks for keys in the validation
- use the specification as a starting point for customizing the configuration of installed applications

### Scope

In this tutorial we will introduce a possible specification for [dockerd](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/dockerd/).
Using `kdb` we will configure the specification.

> NOTE: As the specification for dockerd is quite big we will only present a sample for the above mentioned metakeys and link to a full specification [dockerd-full-spec](../../examples/spec/dockerd.ini).

## Getting Started

Before we start just an overview of the structure:

- Specification file location: `~/.config/dockerd/dockerd-daemon.ni`
- Parent specification key: `spec:/sw/dockerd/dockerd/#0/current`

## Specification Types (values)

`Elektra` supports multiple types which leads to a more flexible specification.
See [type plugin](../../src/plugins/type/README.md) for information about all the types that are supported.

## Mount Setup

### Step 1: Mount dockerd specification

First you need to mount a specification file, in this case `dockerd-daemon.ni` to the `spec:/` namespace.
You can define the path inside the `spec:/` namespace as `/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current`, refer to
[the documentation](https://www.libelektra.org/tutorials/integration-of-your-c-application) to find out more about constructing the name.

```sh
sudo kdb mount "$PWD/.config/dockerd/dockerd-daemon.ni" spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current ni
```

> NOTE: If you encounter any error saying that you have already mounted some specification with the same name you can run
> `sudo kdb umount spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current` and rerun the above command.

> Note: ni is the format which is used for the specification in the file.
> You can also choose to use json, then you need use yajl instead of ni.

### Step 2: Define a mountpoint

Next you can define, that this specification uses a specific mountpoint for a concrete application configuration.
So you can say the concrete configuration should be written to `dockerd-daemon.ni`.

```sh
kdb meta-set spec:/sw/dockerd/dockerd/#0/current mountpoint ~/.config/dockerd/daemon.ni
```

Your `dockerd-daemon.ni` file should now look something like this:

```sh
cat $(kdb file spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current)

# ;Ni1
# ; Generated by the ni plugin using Elektra (see libelektra.org).

# =

# []
#  meta:/mountpoint = ~/.config/dockerd/daemon.ni
```

### Step 3: Do a specification mount

```sh
sudo kdb spec-mount /sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current ni
```

This specification mount makes sure that the paths where the concrete configuration should be (`daemon.ni`)
are ready to fulfill our specification (`dockerd-daemon.ni`).
Be aware that different files get mounted for different namespaces.
You've a specification file (`dockerd-daemon.ni`) for the `spec`-namespace and three files (`daemon.ni`) on different locations
for the `dir`- `user`- and `system`-namespaces.

You can see the files by providing the namespace as prefix to the `kdb file` command:

```sh
kdb file system:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current
# $PWD/.config/dockerd/daemon.ni

kdb file user:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current
# $PWD/$PWD/.config/daemon.ni

kdb file dir:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current
# $PWD/$PWD/.config/daemon.ni
```

> NOTE: The $PWD should equal the PWD where you run `sudo kdb mount "$PWD/.config/dockerd/dockerd-daemon.ni" spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current ni`.

> **_Note_**: The files only exist, when configuration values are stored there,
> i.e. they are created on the first `kdb set` and removed with the last `kdb rm`.

For more information about namespaces in Elektra please see [here](https://www.libelektra.org/man-pages/elektra-namespaces),
a tutorial about the topic is available [here](https://www.libelektra.org/tutorials/namespaces).

## Writing specification for keys

In this example for `dockerd` we will be using 3 types of specifications:

- Simple specification (type and description)
- Enum specifications (for keys were only a set of possible options can be used)
- Array and wildcard specifications (for keys where a list of possible options can be used)

As the `dockerd` specification is big we will just present one of each of the above mentioned specification types.

> NOTE: In Elektra we use `/` instead of `-` to seperate key names.
> This results in a hierarchical structure of key names.
> This commands will automatically store the specification in the `dockerd-daemon.ni` specification file.

### Array specification

```ini
[data/root]
meta:/type = string
meta:/description = Root directory of persistent Docker state
meta:/default = /var/lib/docker
```

In order to get the above specification we will need the following commands:

```sh
kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/data/root type "string"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/data/root description "Root directory of persistent Docker state"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/data/root default "/var/lib/docker"
```

In case no `data/root` key gets configured the value `/var/lib/docker` is used.

Let us verify that the metakeys have been set correctly:

```sh
cat $(kdb file spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current)

# ;Ni1
# ; Generated by the ni plugin using Elektra (see libelektra.org).

# data/root =
#  =

# [data/root]
#  meta:/type = string
#  meta:/description = Root directory of persistent Docker state
#  meta:/default = /var/lib/docker

# []
#  meta:/mountpoint = $PWD/.config/dockerd/daemon.ni
```

### Enum specification (for keys were only a set of possible options can be used)

```ini
[default/cgroupns/mode]
meta:/description = Default mode for containers cgroup namespace
meta:/default = private
meta:/check/enum = #1
meta:/check/enum/#0 = host
meta:/check/enum/#1 = private
```

In order to get the above specification we will need the following commands:

```sh
kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/cgroupns/mode description "Default mode for containers cgroup namespace"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/cgroupns/mode default "private"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/cgroupns/mode check/enum "#1"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/cgroupns/mode check/enum/#0 "host"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/cgroupns/mode check/enum/#1 "private"
```

With this configuration we have managed to allow two possible values for `default/cgroupns/mode`.
The values are `host` and `private`.
The default value if we do not set any configuration is `private`.

Let us verify that the metakeys have been set correctly:

```sh
cat $(kdb file spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current)

# ;Ni1
# ; Generated by the ni plugin using Elektra (see libelektra.org).

# default/cgroupns/mode =
# data/root =
#  =

# [default/cgroupns/mode]
#  meta:/check/enum/#0 = host
#  meta:/check/enum/#1 = private
#  meta:/description = Default mode for containers cgroup namespace
#  meta:/default = private
#  meta:/check/enum = #1

# [data/root]
#  meta:/type = string
#  meta:/description = Root directory of persistent Docker state
#  meta:/default = /var/lib/docker

# []
#  meta:/mountpoint = /home/tmakar/.config/dockerd/daemon.ni
```

### Wildcard specifications (for keys where a list of possible options can be used)

```ini
[default/ulimits/_]
meta:/type = long
meta:/description = Default ulimits for containers
meta:/example = 64000
```

For this specification we want to allow an arbitrary number of `default ulimits`.
The name of the `ulimits` does not matter but all should have the same metakeys.

In order to get the above specification we will need following commands:

```sh
kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/ulimits/_ type "long"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/ulimits/_ description "Default ulimits for containers"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/ulimits/_ example "64000"
```

The above specification will allow us to create any name below the `default/ulimits` key.
The value needs to be a string.
The sample value is `64000`.

Let us verify that the metakeys have been set correctly:

```sh
cat $(kdb file spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current)

# ;Ni1
# ; Generated by the ni plugin using Elektra (see libelektra.org).

# default/ulimits/_ =
# default/cgroupns/mode =
# data/root =
#  =

# [default/ulimits/_]
#  meta:/type = long
#  meta:/example = 64000
#  meta:/description = Default ulimits for containers

# [default/cgroupns/mode]
#  meta:/check/enum/#0 = host
#  meta:/check/enum/#1 = private
#  meta:/description = Default mode for containers cgroup namespace
#  meta:/default = private
#  meta:/check/enum = #1

# [data/root]
#  meta:/type = string
#  meta:/description = Root directory of persistent Docker state
#  meta:/default = /var/lib/docker

# []
#  meta:/mountpoint = /home/tmakar/.config/dockerd/daemon.ni
```

### Array specifications (for keys where a list of possible options can be used)

```ini
[default/address/pools]
meta:/array/min = 0
meta:/description = Default address pools for node specific local networks (list)

[default/address/pools/#/base]
meta:/type = string
meta:/description = Ip address (ipv4) + subnet
meta:/example = 172.30.0.0/16

[default/address/pools/#/size]
meta:/type = short
meta:/description = Number of ip addresses in this pool with base
meta:/example = 24
```

The specification above shows the use of an array specification with the `#` character.
We define the array to have a minimum value of `0` and arbitrary max length.
We use `type`, `description` and `example` as metakeys on the keys beneath each array element.

This configuration above assures that we can configure `pools` with `base` and `size`.

It prevents a configuration like:

```ini
default/address/pools/#0/size = "test"
```

It will fail as `default/address/pools/#/size` is required to be of type `short` when set.

In order to get the above specification we will need following commands:

```sh
kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/address/pools array/min "0"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/address/pools description "Default address pools for node specific local networks (list)"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/address/pools/#/base type "string"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/address/pools/#/base description "Ip address (ipv4) + subnet"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/address/pools/#/base example "172.30.0.0/16"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/address/pools/#/size type "short"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/address/pools/#/size description "Number of ip addresses in this pool with base"

kdb meta-set spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current/default/address/pools/#/size example "24"
```

The above specification defines that we can create array elements and each can have `base` or `size`.

## Final specification code

Your specification should be complete now!
After adding all the keys that are necessary for our application, your specification should look something like this:

```ini
cat $(kdb file spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current)

# ;Ni1
# ; Generated by the ni plugin using Elektra (see libelektra.org).

# default/address/pools/#/base =
# default/ulimits/_ =
# default/cgroupns/mode =
# default/address/pools/#/size =
# data/root =
# default/address/pools =
#  =

# [default/address/pools/#/base]
#  meta:/type = string
#  meta:/example = 172.30.0.0/16
#  meta:/description = Ip address (ipv4) + subnet

# [default/ulimits/_]
#  meta:/type = long
#  meta:/example = 64000
#  meta:/description = Default ulimits for containers

# [default/cgroupns/mode]
#  meta:/check/enum/#0 = host
#  meta:/check/enum/#1 = private
#  meta:/description = Default mode for containers cgroup namespace
#  meta:/default = private
#  meta:/check/enum = #1

# [default/address/pools/#/size]
#  meta:/type = short
#  meta:/example = 24
#  meta:/description = Number of ip addresses in this pool with base

# [data/root]
#  meta:/type = string
#  meta:/description = Root directory of persistent Docker state
#  meta:/default = /var/lib/docker

# []
#  meta:/mountpoint = /home/tmakar/.config/dockerd/daemon.ni

# [default/address/pools]
#  meta:/description = Default address pools for node specific local networks (list)
#  meta:/array/min = 0
```

## Adding full example specification

The above tutorial has given a good overview of how to write a specification.
You might want to add a full example specification for `dockerd`.
To do so, follow the next steps.

To make sure we don't run into errors we will clean up everything we have done by now.

1. `sudo kdb rm -r spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current`
2. `sudo kdb umount spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current`
3. `rm -rf $PWD/.config/dockerd` (make sure that you are in the same PWD as when you run the `sudo kdb mount`)

Now we are going to add an example of [dockerd-full-spec](../../examples/spec/dockerd.ini).

Make sure you are in the root of the cloned `libelektra` repository:

1. `sudo kdb mount "$PWD/.config/dockerd/dockerd-daemon.ni" spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current ni`
2. `kdb meta-set spec:/sw/dockerd/dockerd/#0/current mountpoint ~/.config/dockerd/daemon.ni`
3. `sudo kdb spec-mount /sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current`
4. `sudo kdb import spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current ni < ./examples/spec/dockerd.ini`

To verify that everything was created successfully, run:

```sh
cat $(kdb file spec:/sw/docker/dockerd/#0/current)
```

> NOTE: We want display the output because it is too long to display (~ 400-500 lines).

## Appendix (full specification)

The full specification can be viewed at [dockerd-full-spec](../../examples/spec/dockerd.ini).
