doc/tutorials/odbc-backend.md, before:

# The Elektra ODBC Backend

This tutorial describes how to set up unixODBC on Linux and use Elektra to retrieve
configuration data from an _SQLite_ or _PostgreSQL_ database.

> Currently, the _backend_odbc_ plugin is marked as EXPERIMENTAL and only supports reading
> data from data sources.
> Writing data (e.g. with `kdb set`) should be supported soon.

> The ODBC backend plugin was tested with unixODBC, but should also work with iODBC
> and Microsoft ODBC (on Windows).
> If you are using such an environment, feel free to share you experiences at
> https://issues.libelektra.org or extend this tutorial.

> This tutorial uses SQLite- and PostgreSQL databases as data sources, but ODBC drivers for other data sources
> are also supported.
>
> Please be aware that if you want to use metadata, _outer joins_ have to be supported by the ODBC driver.

## Overview

The tutorial covers the following steps:

1. Introduction
2. Setting up the Databases for Configuration Data
3. Installing unixODBC
4. Installing the SQLite and PostgreSQL ODBC Drivers
5. Creating the ODBC data sources for the Databases
6. Compiling Elektra with support for the ODBC Backend
7. Mounting the data sources into the Global Key Database (KDB) of Elektra

## 1. Introduction

### Database scheme

The basic database scheme is quite simple.
You just need a table that contains two columns which can store a text of arbitrary length.
Usually, the SQL data type `TEXT` is used for that purpose.
One column is used for storing the **names** of the keys, the other one for storing their **values**.
The column where the key-names are stored should be defined as the _primary key_ (PK) for that table.

It is _highly_ recommended, that you also define a table for storing _metadata_.
Otherwise, lots of Elektra's features are not supported.

The table for the metadata needs at least three columns:

- A column with the _key-name_ which must be defined as a _foreign key_ (FK) to the PK of the table where the keys are stored.
- A column for the _name_ of the metakeys.
- A column for the _value_ of the metakeys.

> The column for the **keyname** and the column for the **metakey-name** together form the PK of that table.

Again, all these column should be defined to store the data type `TEXT`.
If you want to use `CHAR` or `VARCHAR` columns, it's your responsibility to make sure that the stored values
don't exceed the maximum defined length.

It is allowed that the tables contain more columns, these additional columns are not processed by Elektra, _must
not_ be part of a PK and _must_ support NULL-values (if you want to add new keys in a future version of Elektra).
Currently, as only read support is implemented, columns that don't support NULL values are also possible, but not recommended.

The following ER-diagram shows the described scheme:

![ER-digramm](/doc/images/unixODBC.png "The ER-diagramm for the described database scheme")

## 2. Setting up the Databases for Configuration Data

Before we are getting started with setting up unixODBC, we create the
databases and store some configuration data in them.

> This tutorial is neither an introduction to SQL nor to SQLite or PostgresSQL.
> If you need more information about these topics, there are plenty of resources available.
>
> For downloads and documentation, please visit the respective websites:
>
> - https://www.sqlite.org
> - https://www.postgresql.org
>
> Usually, both data base management systems (DBMS) can be installed by the package manager
> of your operating system.

> A pre-configured example SQLite database and the SQL-script that was used
> to create the tables and fill them with some test data is available at
> [/src/plugins/backend_odbc/sampleDb](/src/plugins/backend_odbc/sampleDb).

### Preparing the SQLite database

As SQLite as a file-based DBMS, we first create a file for the new database.
Afterwards, we execute the SQL-statements to create the tables and insert some tuples.
Please note that the command `sqlite3` may is named differently on your system, especially
if you use another version of SQLite.

```sh
sqlite3 ~/elektraOdbc.db
```

Then, the SQLite command prompt is started, where you can enter your SQL statements.
We use the statements as defined in
[/src/plugins/backend_odbc/sampleDb/prepareDB.sql](/src/plugins/backend_odbc/sampleDb/prepareDB.sql)

```sql
CREATE TABLE elektraKeys (
    keyName TEXT PRIMARY KEY NOT NULL,
    keyValue TEXT DEFAULT NULL
);

CREATE TABLE metaKeys (
    keyName TEXT,
    metaKeyName TEXT NOT NULL,
    metaKeyValue TEXT DEFAULT NULL,
    CONSTRAINT fk_metakeys FOREIGN KEY (keyName) REFERENCES elektraKeys (keyName),
    CONSTRAINT pk_metaKeys PRIMARY KEY (keyName, metaKeyName)
);

INSERT INTO elektraKeys (keyName, keyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp1/key1', 'sqlite val 1.1');
INSERT INTO elektraKeys (keyName, keyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp1/key2', 'sqlite val 1.2');
INSERT INTO elektraKeys (keyName, keyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp2/key1', 'sqlite val 2.1');
INSERT INTO elektraKeys (keyName, keyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp2/key2', 'sqlite val 2.2');
INSERT INTO elektraKeys (keyName, keyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp2/key3', 'sqlite val 2.3');
INSERT INTO elektraKeys (keyName, keyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp3/key1', 'sqlite val 3.1');


INSERT INTO metaKeys (keyName, metaKeyName, metaKeyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp1/key1', 'metakey 1.1.1', 'metaval 1.1.1');
INSERT INTO metaKeys (keyName, metaKeyName, metaKeyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp1/key1', 'metakey 1.1.2', 'metaval 1.1.2');
INSERT INTO metaKeys (keyName, metaKeyName, metaKeyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp1/key1', 'metakey 1.1.3', 'metaval 1.1.3');
INSERT INTO metaKeys (keyName, metaKeyName, metaKeyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp1/key1', 'metakey 1.1.4', 'metaval 1.1.4');
INSERT INTO metaKeys (keyName, metaKeyName, metaKeyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp2/key2', 'metakey 2.2.1', 'metaval 2.2.1');
INSERT INTO metaKeys (keyName, metaKeyName, metaKeyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp2/key2', 'metakey 2.2.2', 'metaval 2.2.2');
INSERT INTO metaKeys (keyName, metaKeyName, metaKeyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp2/key3', 'metakey 2.3.1', 'metaval 2.3.1');
```

With typing `.exit`, you can leave the SQLite command prompt and return to your shell.

### Preparing the PostgreSQL database

If you want to use PostgreSQL, a bit more initial work is necessary.
It is recommended to set up a user account, create a database and then
create the tables using similar SQL-Statements as given above.
You can run the PostgresSQL instance locally on the same computer where you use Elektra,
but also on another node in the network.
With this approach, it is possible to provide a centralized configuration storage
for a whole network.
As PostgreSQL natively supports transactions, it is also possible to share the same tables
between multiple Elektra clients.
Another option is to save the configurations for different users in separate tables.
When a user logs in on any client PC in the network, the table with the matching configuration data
can then, with some scripting, be mounted via Elektra.

If you need detailed information about how to set up and use a PostgreSQL DBMS instance, there is
excellent documentation, including tutorials for beginners,
available at the [PostgreSQL website](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/tutorial.html).

However, for this tutorial, we present a single-user scenario on a local PC.

## 3. Installing unixODBC

The easiest way to install unixODBC, is to use the package manager of your operating system.
For example, in Debian and Ubuntu you can install the package with the following command:

`sudo apt-get install unixodbc`

Alternatively, you can also compile the unixODBC package from source.
The download is available at https://www.unixodbc.org.
The website also offers some other useful information, like various manuals and a list of
supported ODBC drivers. Using drivers not mentioned in that list is in many cases also possible.

## 4. Installing the SQLite and PostgreSQL ODBC Drivers

The ODBC backend was tested with the following ODBC drivers for unixODBC:

- SQLite: http://www.ch-werner.de/sqliteodbc
- PostgresSQL: https://odbc.postgresql.org

The installation of the drivers should be straightforward.
Please refer to the instructions on the websites and the downloaded drivers for how to install these
ODBC drivers on your system.
Maybe the drivers are also offered as packages by the package manager of your OS.

## 5. Creating the ODBC data sources for the Databases

Now we have to create two configuration files for unixODBC:

- **odbcinst.ini:** for letting unixODBC know about the drivers and where it can find it
- **odbc.ini:** for configuring the actual data sources, which we can then mount into Elektra's KDB

On most systems, these files should be stored at `/etc/unixODBC/`.

Unfortunately, the current Elektra plugins for .ini-files don't support the exact syntax that is used by
the unixODBC configuration files.
Therefore, we have to write the configuration files manually the classic way using a text editor.

### odbcinst.ini

At first, we tell unixODBC where it can find the ODBC drivers we want to use.
The content of the `/etc/unixODBC/odbcinst.ini` file might look like that:

```ini
[SQLite]
Description=SQLite ODBC Driver
Driver=/usr/local/lib/libsqlite3odbc.so
Setup=/usr/local/lib/libsqlite3odbc.so
FileUsage=1
Threading=2

[postgresql]
Description=General ODBC for PostgreSQL
Driver=/usr/local/lib/psqlodbca.so
Setup=/usr/lib/libodbcpsqlS.so
Setup64=/usr/libd64/libodbcpsqlS.so
```

Please check these paths and adjust them so that they match the place where the drivers
and setup libraries are stored on your system.
At first, the name of the entry is defined, in our example `SQLite` and `postgresql`,
then the configuration for the driver is given.

The `Threading=2` option enables multithreading support for the SQLite driver.
If you don't need to use multiple threads/instances accessing the SQLite ODBC data source
in parallel, you can gain a bit of performance by activating the single-threaded mode.
In this case you can set `Threading=0`.

> You have to make sure for yourself that only single-threaded use is present.
> This setting just disables mutexes in the driver.
> So if you are not really sure what you are doing, it's safer to enable the multi-thread support!
>
> More information about this setting is available at https://www.sqlite.org/threadsafe.html.

The setting `FileUsage=1` indicates to unixODBC that the driver is file-based.

### odbc.ini

After the driver settings, we have to define the actual ODBC data sources in `/etc/unixODBC/odbc.ini`.
This file might look like this:

```ini
[Pelektra]
Description=postgresql
Driver=postgresql
Trace=No
Database=elektraDB
Servername=localhost
Username=elektraUser
Password=elektra
Port=5432
Protocol=6.4
ReadOnly=No
RowVersioning=No
ShowSystemTables=No
ShowOidColumn=No
FakeOidIndex=No

[Selektra]
Description=SQLite Database for Elektra
Driver=SQLite
Database=home/user/elektraOdbc.db
Timeout=3500
```

At first, the data source name is chosen, in our example `Pelektra` and `Selektra`,
then the configuration values for the data source are defined.
The value for the key `Driver` must match the corresponding name of the entry that is
defined in `odbcinst.ini`.

## 6. Compiling Elektra with support for the ODBC Backend

The plugin for the ODBC backend is currently marked as **EXPERIMENTAL** and therefore
not built by default.

You must use the correct cmake-parameters for the plugin to be built.
If you want to build all plugins, you can just use

```sh
cmake -DPLUGINS="ALL" <path to elektra root dir>
```

If you want the default behaviour and just additionally include the ODBC backend plugin,
you can use the following command:

```sh
cmake -DPLUGINS="ALL;backend_odbc;-EXPERIMENTAL" <path to elektra root dir>
```

Alternatively, you can also use the ncurses-based `ccmake` tool to define the option.
For more information about how to build Elektra, please see [/doc/COMPILE.md](/doc/COMPILE.md).

Check the cmake output to be sure that the build system finds the ODBC libraries.
Otherwise, the `backend_odbc` plugin gets automatically excluded.

## 7. Mounting the data sources into the Global Key Database (KDB) of Elektra

Now, we can finally mount our ODBC data sources into the global key database (KDB) of Elektra.
Currently, a separate command `kdb mountOdbc` exists for this purpose.
Unfortunately, in contrast to the well-known `kdb mount` for the file-based backend, currently no additional
plugins are supported.
The situation is not ideal and may change in the future.
One option is to provide a general mounting command for all types of backends.

However, for now we use the `kdb mountOdbc` command.
If you just type the command without additonal arguments, you get some information about how the command works
and which arguments are expected.

To fully define a mountpoint for an ODBC data source, we need 11 arguments, 10 for defining the data source, and
the last argument is the path where the mountpoint should be created in the KDB.

The usage-message tells us which arguments are needed and in which order they must be given:

```sh
Usage: kdb mountOdbc <data source name> <user name> <password> <table name>
      <key column name> <value column name> <meta table name> <mt key column name>
      <mt metakey column name> <mt metavalue column name> <mountpoint>
```

If you have read the first section about the expected scheme of the used databases, the arguments
should be self-explanatory.
Nevertheless, here is a listing that describes the different arguments:

- **\<data source name\>:** The name of the data source as defined in `/etc/unixODBC/odbc.ini`.
- **\<user name\>:** The name of the user that should be used for connecting to the data source.
  - If your data source doesn't need a username or you have defined a username in the `odbc.ini` file, you can just pass an empty string `""` here.
- **\<password\>:** The password that should be used to connect to the data source.
  - As with the username, you can pass `""` if no password is needed or the password is already set in the `odbc.ini` file.
- **\<table name\>:** The name of the table where the key-names and -values are stored.
- **\<key column name\>:** The name of the column where the key-names are stored. This must be the PK of the table.
- **\<value column name\>:** The name of the column where the key-values are stored.
- **\<meta table name\>:** The name of the table where the metadata for the keys is stored.
- **\<mt key column name\>:** The column where the name of the key to which the metadata belongs to is stored.
  - This must be a foreign key (FK) to the PK `key column` of the table for the (non-meta) keys.
- **\<mt metakey column name\>:** The name of the column in the meta-table where the names of the metakeys are stored.
  - This column together with the key-column form the PK of the meta-table.
- **\<mt metaval column name\>:** The name of the column in the meta-table where the values of the metakeys are stored.
- **\<mountpoint\>:** The place in the KDB where the new mountpoint should be created (e.g. `user:/odbcData`).

Finally we can create the mountpoint for our SQLite database:

```sh
kdb mountOdbc Selektra "" "" elektraKeys keyName keyValue metaKeys keyName metaKeyName metaKeyValue user:/odbcSqlite
# The new mountpoint for the ODBC data source was successfully created!
```

Now we can just access the data like with any other mountpoint.

```sh
kdb ls user:/odbcSqlite/
# user:/odbcSqlite/sqliteapp1/key1
# user:/odbcSqlite/sqliteapp1/key2
# user:/odbcSqlite/sqliteapp2/key1
# user:/odbcSqlite/sqliteapp2/key2
# user:/odbcSqlite/sqliteapp2/key3
# user:/odbcSqlite/sqliteapp3/key1

kdb get /odbcSqlite/sqliteapp1/key1
# sqlite val 1.1

kdb meta-show user:/odbcSqlite/sqliteapp1/key1
# metakey 1.1.1: metaval 1.1.1
# metakey 1.1.2: metaval 1.1.2
# metakey 1.1.3: metaval 1.1.3
# metakey 1.1.4: metaval 1.1.4
```

For unmounting, there is not an extra command for ODBC data sources.
You can unmount the ODBC backend, exactly like mounted files:

```sh
kdb umount user:/odbcSqlite
```

Commit message:

doc: update README.md and tutorial - ODBC backend
- clarify current situation of metadata handling
- fix some typos

doc/tutorials/odbc-backend.md, after:

# The Elektra ODBC Backend

This tutorial describes how to set up unixODBC on Linux and use Elektra to retrieve
configuration data from an _SQLite_ or _PostgreSQL_ database.

> Currently, the _backend_odbc_ plugin is marked as EXPERIMENTAL and only supports reading
> data from data sources.
> Writing data (e.g. with `kdb set`) should be supported soon.
> Also, currently only data sources that define a table for _metadata_ are supported.
> In the future, we plan to also support data sources without metadata tables.

> The ODBC backend plugin was tested with unixODBC, but should also work with iODBC
> and Microsoft ODBC (on Windows).
> If you are using such an environment, feel free to share you experiences at
> https://issues.libelektra.org or extend this tutorial.

> This tutorial uses SQLite- and PostgreSQL databases as data sources, but ODBC drivers for other data sources
> are also supported.
>
> Please be aware that if you want to use metadata, _outer joins_ have to be supported by the ODBC driver.

## Overview

The tutorial covers the following steps:

1. Introduction
2. Setting up the Databases for Configuration Data
3. Installing unixODBC
4. Installing the SQLite and PostgreSQL ODBC Drivers
5. Creating the ODBC data sources for the Databases
6. Compiling Elektra with support for the ODBC Backend
7. Mounting the data sources into the Global Key Database (KDB) of Elektra

## 1. Introduction

### Database scheme

The basic database scheme is quite simple.
You just need a table that contains two columns which can store a text of arbitrary length.
Usually, the SQL data type `TEXT` is used for that purpose.
One column is used for storing the **names** of the keys, the other one for storing their **values**.
The column where the key-names are stored should be defined as the _primary key_ (PK) for that table.

<!-- /* TODO: uncomment when support for data sources without a metadata table is implemented */
It is _highly_ recommended, that you also define a table for storing _metadata_.
Otherwise, lots of Elektra's features are not supported.-->

Next, we have to create a table for storing metadata.
The table for the metadata needs at least three columns:

- A column with the _key-name_ which must be defined as a _foreign key_ (FK) to the PK of the table where the keys are stored.
- A column for the _name_ of the metakeys.
- A column for the _value_ of the metakeys.

> The column for the **keyname** and the column for the **metakey-name** together form the PK of that table.

Again, all these column should be defined to store the data type `TEXT`.
If you want to use `CHAR` or `VARCHAR` columns, it's your responsibility to make sure that the stored values
don't exceed the maximum defined length.

It is allowed that the tables contain more columns, these additional columns are not processed by Elektra, _must
not_ be part of a PK and _must_ support NULL-values (if you want to add new keys in a future version of Elektra).
Currently, as only read support is implemented, columns that don't support NULL values are also possible, but not recommended.

The following ER-diagram shows the described scheme:

![ER-diagram](/doc/images/unixODBC.png "The ER-diagram for the described database scheme")

## 2. Setting up the Databases for Configuration Data

Before we are getting started with setting up unixODBC, we create the
databases and store some configuration data in them.

> This tutorial is neither an introduction to SQL nor to SQLite or PostgresSQL.
> If you need more information about these topics, there are plenty of resources available.
>
> For downloads and documentation, please visit the respective websites:
>
> - https://www.sqlite.org
> - https://www.postgresql.org
>
> Usually, both database management systems (DBMS) can be installed by the package manager
> of your operating system.

> A pre-configured example SQLite database and the SQL-script that was used
> to create the tables and fill them with some test data is available at
> [/src/plugins/backend_odbc/sampleDb](/src/plugins/backend_odbc/sampleDb).

### Preparing the SQLite database

As SQLite as a file-based DBMS, we first create a file for the new database.
Afterward, we execute the SQL-statements to create the tables and insert some tuples.
Please note that the command `sqlite3` may is named differently on your system, especially
if you use another version of SQLite.

```sh
sqlite3 ~/elektraOdbc.db
```

Then, the SQLite command prompt is started, where you can enter your SQL statements.
We use the statements as defined in
[/src/plugins/backend_odbc/sampleDb/prepareDB.sql](/src/plugins/backend_odbc/sampleDb/prepareDB.sql)

```sql
CREATE TABLE elektraKeys (
    keyName TEXT PRIMARY KEY NOT NULL,
    keyValue TEXT DEFAULT NULL
);

CREATE TABLE metaKeys (
    keyName TEXT,
    metaKeyName TEXT NOT NULL,
    metaKeyValue TEXT DEFAULT NULL,
    CONSTRAINT fk_metakeys FOREIGN KEY (keyName) REFERENCES elektraKeys (keyName),
    CONSTRAINT pk_metaKeys PRIMARY KEY (keyName, metaKeyName)
);

INSERT INTO elektraKeys (keyName, keyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp1/key1', 'sqlite val 1.1');
INSERT INTO elektraKeys (keyName, keyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp1/key2', 'sqlite val 1.2');
INSERT INTO elektraKeys (keyName, keyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp2/key1', 'sqlite val 2.1');
INSERT INTO elektraKeys (keyName, keyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp2/key2', 'sqlite val 2.2');
INSERT INTO elektraKeys (keyName, keyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp2/key3', 'sqlite val 2.3');
INSERT INTO elektraKeys (keyName, keyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp3/key1', 'sqlite val 3.1');


INSERT INTO metaKeys (keyName, metaKeyName, metaKeyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp1/key1', 'metakey 1.1.1', 'metaval 1.1.1');
INSERT INTO metaKeys (keyName, metaKeyName, metaKeyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp1/key1', 'metakey 1.1.2', 'metaval 1.1.2');
INSERT INTO metaKeys (keyName, metaKeyName, metaKeyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp1/key1', 'metakey 1.1.3', 'metaval 1.1.3');
INSERT INTO metaKeys (keyName, metaKeyName, metaKeyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp1/key1', 'metakey 1.1.4', 'metaval 1.1.4');
INSERT INTO metaKeys (keyName, metaKeyName, metaKeyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp2/key2', 'metakey 2.2.1', 'metaval 2.2.1');
INSERT INTO metaKeys (keyName, metaKeyName, metaKeyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp2/key2', 'metakey 2.2.2', 'metaval 2.2.2');
INSERT INTO metaKeys (keyName, metaKeyName, metaKeyValue) VALUES ('sqliteapp2/key3', 'metakey 2.3.1', 'metaval 2.3.1');
```

With typing `.exit`, you can leave the SQLite command prompt and return to your shell.

### Preparing the PostgreSQL database

If you want to use PostgreSQL, a bit more initial work is necessary.
It is recommended to set up a user account, create a database and then
create the tables using similar SQL-Statements as given above.
You can run the PostgresSQL instance locally on the same computer where you use Elektra,
but also on another node in the network.
With this approach, it is possible to provide a centralized configuration storage
for a whole network.
As PostgreSQL natively supports transactions, it is also possible to share the same tables
between multiple Elektra clients.
Another option is to save the configurations for different users in separate tables.
When a user logs in on any client PC in the network, the table with the matching configuration data
can then, with some scripting, be mounted via Elektra.

If you need detailed information about how to set up and use a PostgreSQL DBMS instance, there is
excellent documentation, including tutorials for beginners,
available at the [PostgreSQL website](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/tutorial.html).

However, for this tutorial, we present a single-user scenario on a local PC.

## 3. Installing unixODBC

The easiest way to install unixODBC, is to use the package manager of your operating system.
For example, in Debian and Ubuntu you can install the package with the following command:

`sudo apt-get install unixodbc`

Alternatively, you can also compile the unixODBC package from source.
The download is available at https://www.unixodbc.org.
The website also offers some other useful information, like various manuals and a list of
supported ODBC drivers. Using drivers not mentioned in that list is in many cases also possible.

## 4. Installing the SQLite and PostgreSQL ODBC Drivers

The ODBC backend was tested with the following ODBC drivers for unixODBC:

- SQLite: http://www.ch-werner.de/sqliteodbc
- PostgresSQL: https://odbc.postgresql.org

The installation of the drivers should be straightforward.
Please refer to the instructions on the websites and the downloaded drivers for how to install these
ODBC drivers on your system.
Maybe the drivers are also offered as packages by the package manager of your OS.

## 5. Creating the ODBC data sources for the Databases

Now we have to create two configuration files for unixODBC:

- **odbcinst.ini:** for letting unixODBC know about the drivers and where it can find it
- **odbc.ini:** for configuring the actual data sources, which we can then mount into Elektra's KDB

On most systems, these files should be stored at `/etc/unixODBC/`.

Unfortunately, the current Elektra plugins for .ini-files don't support the exact syntax that is used by
the unixODBC configuration files.
Therefore, we have to write the configuration files manually the classic way using a text editor.

### odbcinst.ini

At first, we tell unixODBC where it can find the ODBC drivers we want to use.
The content of the `/etc/unixODBC/odbcinst.ini` file might look like that:

```ini
[SQLite]
Description=SQLite ODBC Driver
Driver=/usr/local/lib/libsqlite3odbc.so
Setup=/usr/local/lib/libsqlite3odbc.so
FileUsage=1
Threading=2

[postgresql]
Description=General ODBC for PostgreSQL
Driver=/usr/local/lib/psqlodbca.so
Setup=/usr/lib/libodbcpsqlS.so
Setup64=/usr/libd64/libodbcpsqlS.so
```

Please check these paths and adjust them so that they match the place where the drivers
and setup libraries are stored on your system.
At first, the name of the entry is defined, in our example `SQLite` and `postgresql`,
then the configuration for the driver is given.

The `Threading=2` option enables multithreading support for the SQLite driver.
If you don't need to use multiple threads/instances accessing the SQLite ODBC data source
in parallel, you can gain a bit of performance by activating the single-threaded mode.
In this case you can set `Threading=0`.

> You have to make sure for yourself that only single-threaded use is present.
> This setting just disables mutexes in the driver.
> So if you are not really sure what you are doing, it's safer to enable the multi-thread support!
>
> More information about this setting is available at https://www.sqlite.org/threadsafe.html.

The setting `FileUsage=1` indicates to unixODBC that the driver is file-based.

### odbc.ini

After the driver settings, we have to define the actual ODBC data sources in `/etc/unixODBC/odbc.ini`.
This file might look like this:

```ini
[Pelektra]
Description=postgresql
Driver=postgresql
Trace=No
Database=elektraDB
Servername=localhost
Username=elektraUser
Password=elektra
Port=5432
Protocol=6.4
ReadOnly=No
RowVersioning=No
ShowSystemTables=No
ShowOidColumn=No
FakeOidIndex=No

[Selektra]
Description=SQLite Database for Elektra
Driver=SQLite
Database=home/user/elektraOdbc.db
Timeout=3500
```

At first, the data source name is chosen, in our example `Pelektra` and `Selektra`,
then the configuration values for the data source are defined.
The value for the key `Driver` must match the corresponding name of the entry that is
defined in `odbcinst.ini`.

## 6. Compiling Elektra with support for the ODBC Backend

The plugin for the ODBC backend is currently marked as **EXPERIMENTAL** and therefore
not built by default.

You must use the correct cmake-parameters for the plugin to be built.
If you want to build all plugins, you can just use

```sh
cmake -DPLUGINS="ALL" <path to elektra root dir>
```

If you want the default behaviour and just additionally include the ODBC backend plugin,
you can use the following command:

```sh
cmake -DPLUGINS="ALL;backend_odbc;-EXPERIMENTAL" <path to elektra root dir>
```

Alternatively, you can also use the ncurses-based `ccmake` tool to define the option.
For more information about how to build Elektra, please see [/doc/COMPILE.md](/doc/COMPILE.md).

Check the cmake output to be sure that the build system finds the ODBC libraries.
Otherwise, the `backend_odbc` plugin gets automatically excluded.

## 7. Mounting the data sources into the Global Key Database (KDB) of Elektra

Now, we can finally mount our ODBC data sources into the global key database (KDB) of Elektra.
Currently, a separate command `kdb mountOdbc` exists for this purpose.
Unfortunately, in contrast to the well-known `kdb mount` for the file-based backend, currently no additional
plugins are supported.
The situation is not ideal and may change in the future.
One option is to provide a general mounting command for all types of backends.

However, for now we use the `kdb mountOdbc` command.
If you just type the command without additional arguments, you get some information about how the command works
and which arguments are expected.

To fully define a mountpoint for an ODBC data source, we need 11 arguments, 10 for defining the data source, and
the last argument is the path where the mountpoint should be created in the KDB.

The usage-message tells us which arguments are needed and in which order they must be given:

```sh
Usage: kdb mountOdbc <data source name> <user name> <password> <table name>
      <key column name> <value column name> <meta table name> <mt key column name>
      <mt metakey column name> <mt metavalue column name> <mountpoint>
```

If you have read the first section about the expected scheme of the used databases, the arguments
should be self-explanatory.
Nevertheless, here is a listing that describes the different arguments:

- **\<data source name\>:** The name of the data source as defined in `/etc/unixODBC/odbc.ini`.
- **\<user name\>:** The name of the user that should be used for connecting to the data source.
  - If your data source doesn't need a username, or you have defined a username in the `odbc.ini` file, you can just pass an empty string `""` here.
- **\<password\>:** The password that should be used to connect to the data source.
  - As with the username, you can pass `""` if no password is needed or the password is already set in the `odbc.ini` file.
- **\<table name\>:** The name of the table where the key-names and -values are stored.
- **\<key column name\>:** The name of the column where the key-names are stored. This must be the PK of the table.
- **\<value column name\>:** The name of the column where the key-values are stored.
- **\<meta table name\>:** The name of the table where the metadata for the keys is stored.
- **\<mt key column name\>:** The column where the name of the key to which the metadata belongs to is stored.
  - This must be a foreign key (FK) to the PK `key column` of the table for the (non-meta) keys.
- **\<mt metakey column name\>:** The name of the column in the meta-table where the names of the metakeys are stored.
  - This column together with the key-column form the PK of the meta-table.
- **\<mt metaval column name\>:** The name of the column in the meta-table where the values of the metakeys are stored.
- **\<mountpoint\>:** The place in the KDB where the new mountpoint should be created (e.g. `user:/odbcData`).

Finally, we can create the mountpoint for our SQLite database:

```sh
kdb mountOdbc Selektra "" "" elektraKeys keyName keyValue metaKeys keyName metaKeyName metaKeyValue user:/odbcSqlite
# The new mountpoint for the ODBC data source was successfully created!
```

Now we can just access the data like with any other mountpoint.

```sh
kdb ls user:/odbcSqlite/
# user:/odbcSqlite/sqliteapp1/key1
# user:/odbcSqlite/sqliteapp1/key2
# user:/odbcSqlite/sqliteapp2/key1
# user:/odbcSqlite/sqliteapp2/key2
# user:/odbcSqlite/sqliteapp2/key3
# user:/odbcSqlite/sqliteapp3/key1

kdb get /odbcSqlite/sqliteapp1/key1
# sqlite val 1.1

kdb meta-show user:/odbcSqlite/sqliteapp1/key1
# metakey 1.1.1: metaval 1.1.1
# metakey 1.1.2: metaval 1.1.2
# metakey 1.1.3: metaval 1.1.3
# metakey 1.1.4: metaval 1.1.4
```

For unmounting, there is not an extra command for ODBC data sources.
You can unmount the ODBC backend, exactly like mounted files:

```sh
kdb umount user:/odbcSqlite
```
